---
layout: narrative

title: >
    The Indian of Commerce
source: 
---

 	  	 		    			 				 				
# THE INDIAN OF COMMERCE. 

  				For purposes of literary classification, all Indians may be divided, quite 					regardless of linguistic affinities, into three sole tribes—the human, 					the inhuman, and the super-human. There is the actual aborigine, interesting to 					competent fiction as to science because he is a man and at the same time a 					living archive from the childhood of the race. There is the wooden eikon which 					stands for questionable cigars or unquestionable penny-a-lining—in 					either case a mere peg upon which to hang commercial profit. And there is also 					the Red Man of Rhapsody—a conveniently distant fiction to carry 					heroics which would seem rather too absurd if fathered upon poor human nature as 					we see it next door. With the last-mentioned tribe deals one of the handsomest 					and one of the most preposterous books of the season, 'A Child of the Sun,' by 					Charles Eugene Banks (Stone). Brilliant as a parrot in mechanical coloration, 					the text also seems to have undergone some mental "three-color process." 					Fenimore Cooper was cold ethnography to this, and even Prescott's Empire of 					Montezuma quite as true to life. There is nothing Indian in these pages, except 					the good intention. A curbstone version of the "legend" of the Piasau serves for 					warp; and into it the author has woven a truly curious fabric of girl-graduate 					mundiloquence and scope. Nominally in prose, the book is in fact very largely 					couched in wilful and poor Hiawathan measure, doubly cheap by being masked in 					"long type." Perhaps the most diagrammatic comment on the quality of the volume 					is in its own exemplary lines about "Pakoble," belle of the "Arctide" tribe, who 					was "so perfect in beauty that the artists of the Arctides often begged the 					favor of her time, that they might preserve her loveliness to future 					generations." It must be said that the fifteen "color-type" illustrations, by 					Louis Betts, are far and away above their company and their sort. Of no value as 					racial types, they are very uncommonly attractive and sympathetic, and not 					without a touch of real poetry in conception as well as in color-scheme. Its 					whole dress would befit a worthier volume. 

 				In boards and "bleating buckskin" (born sheep) and of a cover design grateful to 					the aesthetic if not to the scientific eye, 'An Alphabet of Indians' (Russell) 					is a  posthumous collection from Emery Leverett Williams. The 					twenty-six folio-page drawings, bluntly posteresque, are not ill-done in their 					sort. As to verisimilitude, however, they are much closer to the alphabet than 					to the Indian—as doubtless should be expected of diversions in this 					category, under which the dragon's teeth of Cadmus come up, with the 					processional years, as Brownies, Gibson-Girls, Pickaninnies, Wild Animals I Have 					Guessed At, and so on. It is a special altruism of the alphabet that it 					furnishes more or less pretext for just about the largest number of drawings 					that may safely be marketed at once. All twenty-five of the tribes here 					compulsorily foregathered look much more like one another than like themselves, 					and the ethnic differentiation of them would be hopeless but for the convenient 					lettering. The alternate pages of text are wholly commonplace, and very largely 					misleading—thanks, chiefly, to an apparent system of attributing 					traits, heard-of as "Indian," to the tribe whose page chances to have most space 					left. "Travvis poles," and jackrabbits that burrow, are among the contributions 					to knowledge here presented. Children, at whom the book is seemingly levelled, 					will find no special thrill in its pictures, and no competent information 					whatever in its letterpress. 

 				George Bird Grinnell's 'Jack among the Indians' is a boy's book, in which 					interest must derive from no special magnetism or impulse of the author, but 					from his peculiarly matter-of-fact habit of narration, as of a real happening in 					settings as familiar to him as attractive to all boys. This is not necessarily 					dispraise. Like Mr. Grinnell's more serious work, this tale is an unimaginative, 					every-day presentment of Western and Indian themes by a man who has a very 					unusual practical familiarity with both. 

 				Amid the perennial output of books which might in fact just as well be about any 					other topic whatever, but, for considerations of the market, are anilined with a 					weak suffusion of Indian, it is a grateful pleasure to commend Albert Ernest 					Jenks's honest and unpretentious story of 'The Childhood of Ji-Shib, the 					Ojibwa.' It is for "popular" consumption, but Dr. Jenks's technical paper on 					"The Wild Rice Gatherers of the Upper Lakes" gave us reason to expect the 					accuracy we find here. Without special literary grace, beyond its directness and 					homely intuition, the little book is workmanlike, interesting, and informative. 					It will appeal to unspoiled children of any age, and will repay their interest 					with principle. The author's decorations can hardly be said to better the page. 					Nor does Professor McGee's introduction add to the accuracy of a generally 					reliable book, with his gloss upon "the Red Man" and the "Red child." Our 					aborigines are brown. A veritable "Red Indian" would be as much a treasure for 					any museum as a marked man among his people. With much more creditable 					observation, *he* calls *us* "red." 

 				For reasons not particularly obscure, our generic Indian policy seems not only 					not to stimulate, but in fact to strangle, the individual and potential 					mentality which all first-hand students have detected in our American aborigine. 					Politically denied the civic status and responsibility which should develop him; 					submerged in an interminable tutelage which is devised rather for the tutor's 					convenience than for the ward's betterment, and has no logical plan of majority; 					bound down to a scheme of "education" which is almost exclusively materialistic, 					it is small wonder that he has failed to give us a literature which should have 					been fascinating and precious almost beyond compare—the unadulterated 					expression of a people clear-thinking, unsophisticated, far nearer to nature 					than we may ever again come, and of opportunity for a valuable connotation of 					our own history. That which should have been the foreword of any real conspectus 					of "American Literature," the word of the First Americans, has somewhere been 					smothered in our processes. The great Government print-factory schools turn out 					still faster their bolts of human calico, and in more unvarying patterns of 					mediocrity. With another generation, the literal aboriginal mind, with all its 					value of originality, individuality, and nearness to the unsophisticated fact, 					will have disappeared. There will be Indians no longer, but smatters of "white 					men" under a brown complexion. We have somewhere, somehow, wasted our chance to 					bring out one of the most significant, instructive, and delightful members 					American scholarship might have had—the classics of the First 					Americans. And this is strange, for a consciously superior nation. We have thus 					far developed nothing to rival, nor even fairly to suggest, that astonishing 					"school" of American Indian poets, essayists, theologues, and historians evolved 					and nurtured by Spanish rule in Mexico, Peru, and other American colonies, more 					than three hundred years ago. The poetry, the oratory, the simple but adequate 					philosophy, of our own tribes, have been clearly enough vouched for, and more or 					less competently recorded, by our students of their folklore, their ethnology, 					and their history—but why not by themselves? Why have we had no 					Tezozomoc, no Camargo, no Diego Duran, no Salcamayhun, no Ixtilixochitls, to 					give us American history from the side of the invaded? Why not even a Garcilaso 					de la Vega, whose notorious 'Comentarios Reales' and 'Florida del Inca' are 					quite as scientific and sober history as much that still sells enormously among 					us in three-volume editions; whose sixteenth-century ethnology is still 					unconfessedly followed in very many pretentious works; and whose rare and hardly 					known little volume of poems (1581) is as saturated a solution of Virgil as the 					best Harvard undergraduate of them all could write now if he tried? 

 				The answer is, of course, that our Government plan of Indian education is neither 					devised nor operated by poets and historians, nor yet aimed at producing them. 					It has devolved some Indian police, some Rough Riders amenable to Rooseveltian 					discipline, several very tolerable brass-bands, and foot-ball teams much more 					than tolerable. But these are its jewels. Its average output is of cobblers, 					tinkers, typesetters, and the like, who can have no livelihood if they go home 					to their nomad fathers, and who presently will be "looked after" by the labor 					unions if they presume to practise these industries in competition with 					"Americans." Also, farm hands—not at all farmers, for they are taught 					by non-farmers, mostly, and in every event taught the tenets which are not only 					useless but prejudicial when applied to the unlike climatic conditions where 					their tribal lands are situated. Most vital of all, as a smotherer of human 					development, our system takes the Indian child away from home (confessedly, the 					farther the better), for more convenience of the instructor, and teaches him not 					only without, but practically against, the filial and human affections. In 					effect, the Indian home figures in this plan simply as a potential breeder of 					more pupils—who must, however, be taught, with more or less brutal 					directness, to despise their parents, and who are forced to abandon any language 					in which they might converse with those parents. The vital wisdom of the old 					plan, perhaps unformulated, but so basic that its common-sense humanity atoned 					for and outweighed the feudal and ecclesiastic coloration, was that it taught 					and uplifted the home and the child at the same time. If the child must learn 					Spanish, so did his parents. He was still able to talk with his 					mother—and now in two languages. It is notorious that in our scheme 					many children are sent home unable to speak to or understand their mothers in 					any tongue whatever. There was in the old régime a certain devout 					patience (lacking in ours) which did not have to extinguish the native tongue to 					teach the new one. Under that mediaeval system, the pupil was part of the family 					and part of the State; not a mere unit of raw material for a machine-tender to 					"work up" on salary. 

 				Yet now and then, by sheer character, an Indian does rise superior to our 					Governmental planing-machine—not because of our system, but in its 					direct despite. For instance, it is notorious that the remarkable papers of 					Zitkala-Sa in the *Atlantic* brought down upon her head an 					avalanche of instructorial wrath— most of it in ludicrous rhetorical 					contrast to her clean and high-minded style. Yet those papers were true and of 					serious value, as field students know, and from the merely literary viewpoint 					had an uncommon quality and a humanity as unsullied and refreshing as a mountain 					brook. 

 				Entirely different, but of no less significance, is 'The Middle Five,' by Francis 					la Flesche, son of the Omaha chief E-Sta-ma-za, and well known to students by 					his collaboration with Miss Fletcher upon the folklore and songs of his people. 					It is an unaffected, admirably human, story of Indian boyhood at 					school—a modest Omaha 'Tom Brown'; charming because so real and 					unconscious a human document; valuable because so literal a transcript of the 					aboriginal mind. In the introduction, Mr. La Flesche says, in the quietest way, 					many things whose apparently innocent sarcasm will doubtless be least felt by 					those who are most in need of it. The frontispiece, a sympathetic drawing in 					colors, adds to the virtue of the book, for it is by a young Indian girl 					striving against mostly objective odds to make a living as an American 					illustrator, Miss Angel de Cora. Thoroughly likable for its own sake, this 					little volume must have its place with libraries and students as one of the very 					few, and one of the most considerable, literary productions of our conterminous 					American Indian. 

  			 		 	 