---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Octave Thanet
source: 
---

     
# "OCTAVE THANET"
 A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY WHICH WILL BE FOLLOWED FROM TIME TO TIME BY OTHER SKETCHES OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE WRITING TO-DAY

  WHEN, a decade ago, some one asked "Octave Thanet" to state where she would like to live, her reply was: "Nowhere all the year round."  And if you care to make an attempt to trace Miss French's whereabouts you will very likely discover that she is living up to her declaration.  A modern captain of industry is not more at home anywhere than this delightful writer of short stories — a literary lapidary she might well be termed, so absolutely clean-cut and brilliant is her work.  Miss French has been complimented by pastmasters of the art of literary criticism for work of a widely diversified character.  She shows a remarkable familiarity with life in our bustling west, as well as with that of our less assertive south.  We marvel at this, when we consider that her birth and education is of New England.  However, the fact that fate compelled her to take up residence in Iowa, and inclination led her to spend a part of the year in the south, accounts for those characteristics in her work that are reflective of the sections, and which might possibly puzzle an unsophisticated reader concerning the personality of the author. 

  Miss French was born at Andover, Massachusetts, in 1850, and was educated at the Abbott Academy in that town, though her residence at the beginning of that period was Davenport, Iowa, to which place her father had gone because of failing health — a man of education, and keenly appreciative of literature and art.  Mr. French was descended from William French, a colonial legislator and Indian fighter.  On her maternal grandmother's side, Miss French is descended from the Endicotts, the Richardsons, the Danforths, and other historic families of New England.  Her education predisposed Miss French to the fascinations of economics and philosophy, and she early dabbled in matters which would have warped her nature and placed her in the ranks of the blue-stockings. Happily, editors stood between the ambitious young woman and what would have been a mere avocation, and when she turned her attention, after polite admonitions, to stories which reflected something of her naturally sunny disposition and a keen insight into human nature, they began to take notice of her talents.  Little wonder, then, that when asked: "Who are your heroes in real life?" Miss French answered with promptness: "Magazine editors!"    

It was in 1878, about, that Miss French sent her first story in the line of her newly realized vocation to *Lippincott's Magazine*, which the editor accepted and for which he sent her a check for $42.  This was "A Communist's Wife," and really marks the starting-point in Miss French's literary career, which has since largely devoted itself to realistic portraiture.  This faculty is discernible in an extraordinary degree in those stories founded on her sojourns on the plantation at Clover Bend, on the Black River of Arkansas.  This plantation and incidents connected therewith have been described with painstaking exactness in her stories called "Otto the Knight," "Whitsun Harp, Regulator," "Ma' Bowlin'" and "The Mortgage on Jeffy." 

The final critical estimate of "Octave Thanet's" genius will rest on an article of thirty pages in the *Revue des Deux Mondes*, written some years ago by Mme. Blanc, the gifted French author and critic who, in a visit to this country, sought out Miss French and formed her acquaintance.  "It has only been since I have myself visited the west and the new south of the United States," wrote Mme. Blanc, "that I have been able to realize fully the minute fidelity in the description of things and people which makes each of the short stories of 'Octave Thanet' a little masterpiece of honest and piquant realism.  But a long time previously, in Paris, without yet knowing either their setting or the characters which had inspired them, I had been conscious of the true fineness of what these stories gave us; that warm, broad, and sincere heartbeat of true human life which filled them from one end to the other."  No doubt Mme. Blanc was amazed, too, at the fact that the "Stories of a Western Town," with which she had become acquainted in her own far-away Paris, were to stand her in stead of a guide book when she visited "Octave Thanet's" western preserves. And she was delighted, we may well believe, in visiting Alice French at the Black River plantation to discover how, away off in the land of Nowhere, one may live the idyllic life and at the same time engage in useful pursuits.  It was here, as has been said, that Miss French gained that intimate knowledge of the phase of human nature which stands out so vividly in her southern stories.  She is a close observer of people and customs, and anything out of the ordinary is sure to attract her attention.  As an instance of this faculty of observation and application, a newspaper paragraph concerning the mortgaging of a child was the basis of "The Mortgage on Jeffy," one of her most striking productions. 

"Octave Thanet's" personality is of that character which appeals to enthusiastic admiration, and she makes friends easily by reason of a fusion of qualities more or less rare in her sex — judgment, tact, sympathy, tolerance, and tenderness — with true feminine fondness for all those things in social life which distinguish the gentlewoman. Society makes large demands upon her time, and whether in Chicago, Indianapolis, Memphis, New York, or Boston, Miss French necessarily responds to its exactions, so that one wonders how she finds time to accomplish her literary work.  A striking phase of "Octave Thanet's" kaleidoscopic quality is the possession of a keen sense of the genuinely humorous, an attribute commonly ascribed to the exclusive possession of man — humor which "softens with mirth the inequalities of existence," of which we have striking proof in the testimony of one of her intimate acquaintances: "It is impossible to convey in words the impression she makes upon one; her humor and pathos are both elusive, and exist largely in her personality and manner.  One can no more catch and cage them for inspection than one can cage the fragrance of wild grape blossoms in spring, or the rollicking 'chink' of the bobolink, rioting in    June meadows.  To get an epitome of her qualities, one should have seen her, of a summer evening, clad as Mrs. Jarley, covered with decorations from every crowned head in the world — all carefully purchased at Siegel-Cooper's — and reading testimonials, local and otherwise, to the value of her waxworks, when her voice was not utterly drowned by the shouts and screams of laughter from her audience.  The point of this will be appreciated when I say that the audience was largely composed of factory girls from New York City, and the performance was Miss French's way of adding to their pleasure during their vacation." 

Alice French belongs to a long list of women's clubs in various parts of the country as well as to the Women's Industrial and Educational Union of Boston, the classification of which Miss French passes up as a companion problem to that which has to do with the age of Ann. 

For the most part, the books published by Miss French consist of short stories, many of which have appeared in the magazines.  The complete list would be a long one.  She has, however, published nine volumes, as follows: "Knitters of the Sun" (1887 — Houghton, Mifflin & Co.); "Expiation" (1890 — Scribners); "Otto the Knight" (1893 — Houghton, Mifflin & Co.); "Stories of a Western Town" (1893 — Scribners); "An Adventure in Photography" (1893 — Scribners); "The Missionary Sheriff" (1897 — Harpers); "A Book of True Lovers" (1898 — McClure); "The Heart of Toil" (1898 — Scribners); "A Slave to Duty" (1900 — H. S. Stone & Co.). 

    