---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Observations on the slaves and the indented servants, inlisted in the army, and in the navy of the United States.
source: 
---

 	  	 		 			  				  				
# OBSERVATIONS on the SLAVES and the INDENTED SERVANTS, inlisted in the Army, 					and in the Navy of the United States.

  				 					THE Resolve of Congress, for prohibiting the importation of 					Slaves, demonstrates the consistent zeal of our rulers in the cause of mankind. 					They have endeavoured, as early and as extensively as it then was in their 					power, to reform our morals, by checking the progress of the general 					depravation, which, sooner or later, proves the ruin of the countries, where 					domestic slavery is introduced. From the liberal spirit of that resolve, which, 					soon after, was most cheerfully supported by their constituents, it is natural 					to infer that, had not the necessity of repelling the hostilities of powerful 					invaders so deeply engaged the attention of the several legislative bodies of 					our Union, laws would, long since, have been made, with every precaution, which 					our safety might have dictated, for facilitating emancipations. Many Slaves, 					however, too many perhaps, are incautiously allowed to fight under our banners. 					They share in the dangers and glory of the efforts made by US, the freeborn 					members of the United States, to enjoy, undisturbed, the common rights of human 					nature; and THEY remain SLAVES! 

 				 The exquisite sensibility, the enlightened equity of a free people, cannot 					suffer them to be ungrateful.—To stand indebted for the recovery of 					the least portion of our rights, to a race of men, whose unhappy lot must be to 					continue in a state of the most dishonourable degradation, would be too painful, 					too humiliating.—Have we not ourselves taught those men, on the most 					rational principles, and with all the energy which our feeling could give us, to 					execrate that state as unnatural, and contrary to the laws of GOD? Would public 					faith had been pledged to the Slaves, before they were permitted to fight in our 					cause, that their own liberty was one of the recompences, which they were to 					receive, for their courage and fidelity! It would have been a restitution, not a 					recompence, though policy, to conceal our blushes, should have suggested a name 					for it, which could not wound our pride. 

 				 Other States Have likewise, on extraordinary emergencies, hazarded to employ 					Slaves in their wars; but immediate, or conditional emancipation was, at the 					same time, held up, and most religiously bestowed on them, as the sacred 					retribution of gratitude. GOD forbid, we should act with less generosity and 					justice on similar occasions! France, in the islands of Guadaloupe and 					Martinico, as well as Spain, in the island of Cuba, have, during the course of 					the last war, exhibited to us such laudable examples. The Slaves, whom they 					intrusted with arms, in the defence of their territories, were not only allowed 					to dispose of their whole pay as they thought fit, but indiscriminately partook 					of every other advantage given to the freeborn soldiers of their respective 					States. Britain knows, and we may remember, that these freedmen, animated by 					such encouragements, fought with the greatest intrepidity. They were remarkably 					faithful, and none of them deserted. \-s\Were they not certain, that, had they 					been guilty of that crime, or had they been made prisoners of war, the enemy 					would have sold them, in the same manner that they sold the Slaves who fell into 					their hands? But the owners were indemnified by the State to which they 					belonged, for the loss they sustained, on account of their Slaves, who were 					emancipated for having $$Word$$ in its defence. 

 				 Neither the Slaves who bear arms for us, nor their owners, have, as yet, 					obtained such advantages from any of the United States. Our non-emancipated 					soldiers are almost irresistably tempted to desert to our foes, who never fail 					to employ them against us. There, at least, besides the uncontroled disposal of 					their whole pay, they have a chance for being gifted by the enemy, whom sound 					policy may inspire be generous in this case, with that freedom, which our laws 					do not authorize them to claim as their reward from us, for whose liberty they 					daily expose their lives. It is true, that they are proportionally but few in 					the service; and yet, could we rest assured, that no great misfortune ever will 					arise from the want of benevolent resolves in their behalves, our domestic 					peace, and the jealousy of that honour which impels men to warlike 					atchievements, would demand the most serious attention of the Congress, 					respecting the political existence of inlisted Slaves, or the propriety of 					excluding them from being at any time employed, as soldiers or seamen, in our 					wars. 

 				 There is in the army and navy of the United States another class of oppressed 					men, whose singular usefulness, were they interested to remain with us, and 					whose power to do us numberless injuries, if provoked to fly to the enemy for an 					asylum, are of the greatest importance at this juncture. Their education, 					national prejudices and attachments, the moral principles of a considerable part 					of them, and the opprobrious state to which they are all very unjustly degraded, 					cannot have been considered in their different points of view, before they were 					invited to inlist; otherwise, the possibility of many evils which the resolve, 					relative to them, portends, in its original tenor, would have been discovered, 					and consequently prevented. 

 				 The oppressed persons here meant, are, few of them excepted, Europeans, and born 					in the dominions of Great-Britain. They are those unhappy beings, whom the 					covetousness and treachery of the British merchants, as well as the collusion of 					the British administration, have doomed, whether convicts or not, to temporary 					slavery amongst us, before we became free. Even now, these temporary Slaves are, 					to our dishonour! as remorelesly sold as the Africans, or their offspring; nay, 					the flagitiousness of the deed is aggravated by the mockery and hypocritical 					stile of the owners who advertise them for sale; who, ashamed of their own 					iniquitousness, vainly recur to subterfuges, that it may be extenuated in the 					minds of others—It is THE TIME, not THE BODY or the *person*, of the indented servant, of either sex, which is TO BE SOLD! 					The body or person of such servant is, however, subjected, not by law, but 					connivence, to the wanton barbarity or lewd attempts of the purchaser. It is, in 					fact, as absolutely subjected as the body or person of a Negro, man or woman, 					who is sold as a *legal* Slave.—Can it be much longer 					suffered, in this land of freedom, thus to sport with human nature? 

 				 Now that we are an independent people, the dissoluteness and oppression, which 					are inseparable from that impious trade, will have but a very short duration. 					They must cease of themselves at the expiration of the limited terms of 					servitude, the longest of which can scarcely exceed four years, from this time; 					and but few of our brethren will so long groan under the scandalous yoke. It is 					therefore unreasonable to believe, and it would be excessively cruel to 					insinuate, that any other consideration prevailed on our Delegates, to deprive 					themselves and their constituents of the god-like pleasure of giving 					unconditional deliverance from slavery to all the men, women and children of 					European descent, who had been betrayed into it, and sold to us, by their 					European brethren. But pardonable as the omission may be, neither humanity nor 					self-love will let us reflect upon it without regret. 

 				 Oh! may we soon blot out the reproach which that neglect has justly rendered us 					liable to, since we abolished the novercal government of Britain! May we soon 					impart, at least to those victims, devoted by her degenerate and unnatural sons 					to temporary slavery, the same blessings, to the enjoyment of which we are now 					restored! Let us endear ourselves to them by acts of justice;—let our 					selfishness and severity no longer strengthen the prejudices of their education, 					nor induce them to behold us as their oppressors and enemies. 

 				 They have already been courted to inlist in our service; but, unhappily for us, 					as well as for them, the indemnification allowed to the mastery was not a gift 					to the redeemed servants—It was no more than a loan to 					them—They must discharge it out of their bounty money; and, if that be 					insufficient, out of their pay! An amazing number of these men eagerly seized 					the unexpected opportunity offered them, to rescue themselves from unlawful 					bondage; but the conditions on which they were to obtain their freedom, 					impressing no idea of gratitude on their minds, they determined to desert to the 					enemy, as soon as they could. In the mean while, most of them quickly 					disappeared from the corps in which they inlisted. They afterwards re-inlisted, 					and deserted, as often as they found officers who, over-anxious to fill up their 					companies with greater expedition, or led by sordid motives, were less 					inquisitive than they ought to have been. 

 				 The treasury of the United States has been, by these means, spoliated of an 					immense sum: The extravagant stipulations received, and so easily acquired by 					such unprincipled recruits, who have been mustered as Substitutes, for exempting 					Militia men from being draughted, have been squandered, together with the bounty 					money, in the most flagrant riots; and the lowest kind of profusion has been 					exhibited all over our territories. That profusion is, perhaps, one of the 					principal causes, which have concurred in raising the spirit of extortion with 					such stupendous rapidity, and to that progressive height, in every part of the 					United States, that it must now be speedily forced down, to a degree which may 					admit some toleration.—And indeed, should our absurd complaisance to 					extortioners, that is to traitors, continue but a few weeks longer, we might 					experience far greater woes than those we could reasonably fear from the 					combined malice and power of Great-Britain, unassisted by our own rapaciousness 					or conspiracy. 

 				 The service of the Militia men who have already procured, or may hereafter 					procure, substitutes of the cast we have described, will be lost to the United 					States, during the war, or three years; for, the wording of the recommendatory 					resolve of the Congress declaring that two Militia men shall be exempted from 					being draughted, if they procure one mustered substitute, the abuses which 					result from the resolve, are striking.—Every State which has made laws 					corresponding with the recommendation, will have reason to repent their 					compliance, two men being reputed in actual service, even after the desertion of 					their substitute. They are legally represented, and consequently exempted from 					being draughted, during the whole term. 

  			 		 	 