---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Going to Shrewsbury
source: 
---

        	
#  Jewett, Sarah Orne. "Going to Shrewsbury."  *Atlantic Monthly* 64 (July 1889): 18-24.

  THE train stopped at a way station with apparent unwillingness, and there was barely time for one elderly passenger to be hurried on board before a sudden jerk threw her almost off her unsteady old feet and we moved on.  At my first glance I saw only a perturbed old country woman, laden with a large basket and a heavy bundle tied up in an old-fashioned bundle-handkerchief; then I discovered that she was a friend of mine, Mrs. Peet, who lived on a small farm, several miles from the village.  She used to be renowned for good butter and fresh eggs and the earliest cowslip greens; in fact, she always made the most of her farm's slender resources; but it was some time since I had seen her drive by from market in her ancient thorough-braced wagon. 

The brakeman followed her into the crowded car, also carrying a number of  packages.  I leaned forward and asked Mrs. Peet to sit by me; it was a great pleasure to see her again.  The brakeman seemed relieved, and smiled as he tried to put part of his burden into the rack overhead; but even the flowered carpetbag was much too large, and he explained that he would take care of everything at the end of the car.  Mrs. Peet was not large herself, but with the big basket, and the bundle-handkerchief, and some possessions of my own we had very little spare room. 

"So this 'ere is what you call ridin' in the cars!  Well, I do declare!" said my friend, as soon as she recovered herself a little.  She looked pale and as if she had been in tears, but there was the familiar gleam of good humor in her tired old eyes. 

"Where in the world are you going, Mrs. Peet?" I asked. 

"Can't be you ain't heared about me, dear?" said she.  "Well, the world's bigger than I used to think 't was.  I've broke up, — 't was the only thing *to* do, — and I'm a-movin' to Shrewsbury." 

"To Shrewsbury?  Have you sold the farm?" I exclaimed with sorrow and surprise.  Mrs. Peet was too old and too characteristic to be suddenly transplanted from her native soil. 

"'T wa'n't mine, the place wa'n't."  Her pleasant face hardened slightly.  "He was coaxed an' over-persuaded into signin' off before he was taken away.  Is'iah, son of his sister that married old Josh Peet, come it over him about his bein' past work and how he'd do for him like an own son, an' we owed him a little somethin'.  I'd paid off everythin' but that, an' was fool enough to leave it till the last, on account o' Is'iah's bein' a relation and not needin' his pay much as some others did.  It's hurt me to have the place fall into other hands.  Some wanted me to go right to law; but 't wouldn't be no use.  Is'iah's smarter 'n I be about them matters.  You see he's got my name on the paper, too; he said 't was somethin' 'bout bein' responsible for the taxes.  We was scant o' money, an' I was wore out with watchin' an' bein' broke o' my rest.  After my tryin' hard for risin' forty-five year to provide for bein' past work, here I be, dear, here I be!  I used to drive things smart, you remember.  But we was fools enough in '72 to put about everythin' that we had safe in the bank into that spool factory that come to nothin'.  But I tell ye I could ha' kept myself long 's I lived, if I could ha' held the place.  I'd parted with most o' the woodland, if Is'iah 'd coveted it.  He was welcome to that, 'cept what might keep me in oven-wood.  I've always desired to travel an' see somethin' o' the world, but I've got the chance now when I don't value it no great." 

"Shrewsbury is a busy, pleasant place," I ventured to say by way of comfort, though my heart was filled with rage at the trickery of Isaiah Peet, who had always looked like a fox and behaved like one. 

"Shrewsbury 's b'en held up consid'able for me to smile at," said the poor old soul, "but I tell ye, dear, it's hard to go an' live forty-two miles from where you've always had your home and friends.  It may divert me, but it won't be home.  You might as well set out one o' my old apple-trees on the beach, so 't could see the waves come in, — there wouldn't be no please to it." 

"Where are you going to live in Shrewsbury?" I asked presently. 

"I don't expect to stop long, dear creatur'.  I'm 'most seventy-six year old," and Mrs. Peet turned to look at me with pathetic amusement in her honest wrinkled face.  "I said right out to Is'iah, before a roomful o' the neighbors, that I expected it of him to git me home an' bury me when my time come, and do it respectable; but I wanted to airn my livin', if 't was so I could, till then.  He'd made sly talk, you see, about my electin' to leave the farm and go  'long o' some o' my own folks; but" — and she whispered this carefully — "he didn't give me no chance to stay there without hurtin' my pride and dependin' on him.  I ain't said that to many folks, but all must have suspected.  A good sight on 'em's had money of Is'iah, though, and they don't like to do nothin' but take his part an' be pretty soft spoken, fear it'll git to his ears.  Well, well, dear, we'll let it be bygones, and not think of it no more;" but I saw the great tears roll slowly down her cheeks, and she pulled her bonnet forward impatiently, and looked the other way. 

"There looks to be plenty o' good farmin' land in this part o' the country," she said, a minute later.  "Where be we now?  See them handsome farm buildin's; he must be a well-off man."  But I had to tell my companion that we were still within the borders of the old town where we had both been born.  Mrs. Peet gave a pleased little laugh, like a girl.  "I'm expectin' Shrewsbury to pop up any minute.  I'm feared to be kerried right by.  I wa'n't never aboard of the cars before, but I've so often thought about 'em I don't know but it seems natural.  Ain't it jest like flyin' through the air?  I can't catch holt to see nothin'.  Land! and here's my old cat goin' too, and never mistrustin'.  I ain't told you that I'd fetched her." 

"Is she in that basket?" I inquired with interest. 

"Yis, dear.  Truth was, I calc'lated to have her put out o' the misery o' changin', an' spoke to one o' the Barnes boys, an' he promised me all fair; but he wa'n't there in season, an' I kind o' made excuse to myself to fetch her along.  She's an old creatur', like me, an' I can make shift to keep her some way or 'nother; there's probably mice where we're goin', an' she's a proper mouser that can about keep herself if there's any sort o' chance.  'T will be somethin' o' home to see her goin' an' comin', but I expect we're both on us goin' to miss our old haunts.  I'd love to know what kind o' mousin' there's goin' to be for me!" 

"You mustn't worry," I answered, with all the bravery and assurance that I could muster.  "Your niece will be thankful to have you with her.  Is she one of Mrs. Winn's daughters?" 

"Oh, no, they ain't able; it's Sister Wayland's darter Isabella, that married the overseer of the gre't carriage-shop.  I ain't seen her since just after she was married; but I turned to her first because I knew she was best able to have me, and then I can see just how the other girls is situated and make me some kind of a plot.  I wrote to Isabella, though she *is* ambitious, and said 't was so I'd got to ask to come an' make her a visit, an' she wrote back she would be glad to have me; but she didn't write right off, and her letter was scented up dreadful strong with some sort o' essence, and I don't feel heartened about no great of a welcome. But there.  I've got eyes, an' I can see *how* 't is when I git *where* 't is.  Sister Winn's gals ain't married, an' they've always boarded, an' worked in the shop on trimmin's.  Isabella's well off; she had some means from her father's sister.  I thought it all over by night an' day, an' I recalled that our folks kept Sister Wayland's folks all one winter, when he'd failed up and got into trouble.  I'm reckonin' on sendin' over to-night an' gittin' the Winn gals to come and see me and advise.  Perhaps some on 'em may know of somebody that'll take me for what help I can give about house, or some clever folks that have been lookin' for a smart cat, any ways; no, I don't know 's I could let her go to strangers. 

"There was two or three o' the folks round home that acted real warm-hearted towards me, an' urged me to come an' winter with 'em," continued the exile; "an' this mornin' I wished I'd agreed to, 't was so hard to break away.  But now it's done I feel more 'n ever it's best.  I couldn't bear to live right in sight o' the old place, and come spring I shouldn't 'prove of anything Is'iah ondertakes to do with the land.  Oh, dear sakes! now it comes hard with me not to have had no child'n.  When I was young an' workin' hard and into everything, I felt kind of free an' superior to them that was so blessed, an' their houses cluttered up from mornin' till night, but I tell ye it comes home to me now. I'd be most willin' to own to even Is'iah, mean 's he is; but I tell ye I'd took it out of him 'fore he was a grown man, if there'd be'n any virtue in cow-hidin' of him.  Folks don't look like wild creatur's for nothin'.  Is'iah's got fox blood in him, an' p'r'aps 't is his misfortune.  His own mother always favored the looks of an old fox, true's the world; she was a poor tool, — a poor tool! I d' know 's we ought to blame him same 's we do. 

"I've always been a master proud woman, if I was riz among the pastures," Mrs. Peet added, half to herself.  There was no use in saying much to her; she was conscious of little beside her own thoughts and the smouldering excitement caused by this great crisis in her simple existence.  Yet the atmosphere of her loneliness, uncertainty, and sorrow was so touching that after scolding again at her nephew's treachery, and finding the tears come fast to my eyes as she talked, I looked intently out of the car window, and tried to think what could be done for the poor soul.  She was one of the old-time people, and I hated to have her go away; but even if she could keep her home she would soon be too feeble to live there alone, and some definite plan must be made for her comfort. Farms in that neighborhood were not valuable.  Perhaps through the agency of the law and quite in secret, Isaiah Peet could be forced to give up his unrighteous claim.  Perhaps, too, the Winn girls, who were really no longer young, might have saved something, and would come home again.  But it was easy to make such pictures in one's mind, and I must do what I could through other people, for I was just leaving home for a long time.  I wondered sadly about Mrs. Peet's future, and the ambitious Isabella, and the favorite Sister Winn's daughters, to whom, with all their kindliness of heart, the care of so old and perhaps so dependent an aunt might seem impossible.  The truth about life in Shrewsbury would soon be known; more than half the short journey was already past. 

To my great pleasure, my fellow-traveler now began to forget her own troubles in looking about her.  She was an alert, quickly interested old soul, and this was a bit of neutral ground between the farm and Shrewsbury, where she was unattached and irresponsible.  She had lived through the last tragic moments of her old life, and felt a certain relief, and Shrewsbury might be as far away as the other side of the Rocky Mountains for all the consciousness she had of its real existence.  She was simply a traveler for the time being, and began to comment, with delicious phrases and shrewd understanding of human nature, on two or three persons near us who attracted her attention. 

"Where do you suppose they be all goin'?" she asked contemptuously.  "There ain't many on 'em but what looks kind o' respectable.  I'll warrant they've left work to home they'd ought to be doin'.  I knowed, if ever I stopped to think, that cars was hived full o' folks, an' wa'n't run to an' fro for nothin'; but these can't be quite up to the average, can they?  Some on 'em 's real thrif'less; guess they've be'n shoved out o' the last place, an' goin' to try the next one, — *like me*, I suppose you'll want to say!  Jest see that flauntin' old creatur' that looks like a stopped clock.  There! everybody can't be o' one goodness, even preachers."  

I was glad to have Mrs. Peet amused, and we were as cheerful as we could be for a few minutes.  She said earnestly that she hoped to be forgiven for such talk, but there were some kinds of folks in the cars that she never had seen before.  But when the conductor came to take her ticket she relapsed into her first state of mind, and was at a loss. 

"You'll have to look after me, dear, when we get to Shrewsbury," she said, after we had spent some distracted moments in hunting for the ticket, and the cat had almost escaped from the basket, and the bundle-handkerchief had become untied and all its miscellaneous contents scattered about our laps and the floor.  It was a touching collection of the last odds and ends of Mrs. Peet's housekeeping: some battered books, and singed holders for flatirons, and the faded little shoulder shawl that I had seen her wear many a day about her bent shoulders.  There were her old tin match-box spilling all its matches, and a goose-wing for brushing up ashes, and her much-thumbed Leavitt's Almanac.  It was most pathetic to see these poor trifles out of their places.  At last the ticket was found in her left-hand woolen glove, where her stiff, work-worn hand had grown used to the feeling of it. 

"I shouldn't wonder, now, if I come to like living over to Shrewsbury first-rate," she insisted, turning to me with a hopeful, eager look to see if I differed.  "You see 't won't be so tough for me as if I hadn't always felt it lurking within me to go off some day or 'nother an' see how other folks did things.  I do' know but what the Winn gals have laid up somethin' sufficient for us to take a house, with the little mite I've got by me.  I might keep house for us all, 'stead o' boardin' round in other folks' houses.  That I ain't never been demeaned to, but I dare say I should find it pleasant in some ways.  Town folks has got the upper hand o' country folks, but with all their work an' pride they can't make a dandelion.  I do' know the times when I've set out to wash Monday mornin's, an' tied out the line betwixt the old pucker-pear tree and the corner o' the barn, an' thought, 'Here I be with the same kind o' week's work right over again.'  I'd wonder kind o' f'erce if I couldn't git out of it noways; an' now here I be out of it, and an up-rooteder creatur' never stood on the airth.  Just as I got to feel I had somethin' ahead come that spool-factory business. There! you know he never was a forehanded man; his health was slim, and he got discouraged pretty nigh before ever he begun.  I hope he don't know I'm turned out o' the old place.  'Is'iah's well off; he'll do the right thing by ye,' says he.  But my! I turned hot all over when I found out what I'd put my name to, — me that had always be'n counted a smart woman!  I did ondertake to read it over, but I couldn't sense it.  I've told all the folks so when they laid it off on to me some: but handwritin' is awful tedious, and my head felt that day as if the works was gone." 

"I ain't goin' to sag on to nobody," she assured me eagerly, as the train rushed along.  "I've got more work in me now than folks expects at my age.  I may be consid'able use to Isabella. She's got a family, an' I'll take right holt in the kitchen or with the little gals.  She had four on 'em, last I heared.  Isabella was never one that liked house-work.  Little gals!  I do' know now but what they must be about grown, time doos slip away so.  I expect I shall look outlandish to 'em.  But there! everybody knows me to home, an' nobody knows me to Shrewsbury; 't wont [sic] make a mite o' difference, if I take holt willin'." 

I hoped, as I looked at Mrs. Peet, that she never would be persuaded to cast off the gathered brown silk bonnet and the plain shawl that she had worn so many years; but Isabella might think it best to insist upon more modern fashions.  Mrs. Peet suggested, as if it were a matter of little consequence, that she had kept it in mind to buy some mourning; but there were other things to be thought of first, and so she had let it go until winter, any way, or until she should be fairly settled in Shrewsbury. 

"Are your nieces expecting you by this train?" I was moved to ask, though with all the good soul's ready talk and appealing manner I could hardly believe that she was going to Shrewsbury for more than a visit; it seemed as if she must return to the worn old farmhouse over by the sheep-lands.  She answered that one of the Barnes boys had written for her the day before, and there was evidently little uneasiness about her first reception. 

We drew near the junction where I must leave her within a mile of the town.  The cat was clawing indignantly at her basket, and her mistress grew as impatient of the car.  She began to look very old and pale, my poor fellow-traveler, and said that she felt dizzy, going so fast.  Presently the friendly red-cheeked young brakeman came along, bringing the carpet-bag and other possessions, and insisted upon taking the alarmed cat beside, in spite of an aggressive paw that had worked its way through the wicker prison. Mrs. Peet watched her goods disappear with suspicious eyes, and clutched her bundle-handkerchief as if it might be all she could save.  Then she anxiously got to her feet, much too soon, and when I said good-by to her at the car door she was ready to cry.  I pointed to the car which she was to take next on the branch line of railway, and I assured her that it was only a few minutes' ride to Shrewsbury, and that I felt certain she would find somebody waiting.  The sight of that worn, thin figure adventuring alone across the platform gave my heart a sharp pang as the train carried me away. 

Some of the passengers who sat near asked me about my old friend with great sympathy, after she had gone.  There was a look of tragedy about her, and indeed it had been impossible not to get a good deal of her history, as she talked straight on in the same tone, when we stopped at a station, as if the train were going at full speed, and some of her remarks caused pity and amusement by turns.  At the last minute she said, with deep self-reproach, "Why, I haven't asked a word about your folks; but you'd ought to excuse such an old stray hen as I be."  

In the spring I was driving by on what the old people of my native town call the sheep-lands road, and the sight of Mrs. Peet's former home brought our journey freshly to mind.  I had heard from her last just after she had got to Shrewsbury, when she had sent me a message. 

"Have you ever heard how she got on?" I eagerly asked my companion. 

"Didn't I tell you that I met her in Shrewsbury High Street one day?" I was answered.  "She seemed perfectly delighted with everything.  Her nieces have laid up a good bit of money, and are soon to leave the mill, and most thankful to have old Mrs. Peet with them.  Somebody told me that they wished to buy the farm here, and come back to live; but she wouldn't hear of it, and thought they would miss too many privileges.  She has been going to concerts this winter, and insists that Isaiah did her a good turn." 

We both laughed.  My own heart was filled with joy, for the uncertain, lonely face of this homeless old woman had often haunted me.  The rain-blackened little house did certainly look dreary, and a whole lifetime of patient toil lad left few traces.  The pucker-pear tree was in full bloom, however, and gave a welcome gayety to the deserted door-yard. 

A little way beyond we met Isaiah Peet, the prosperous money-lender, who  had cheated the old woman of her own.  I fancied that he looked somewhat ashamed, as he recognized us.  To my surprise, he stopped his horse in most social fashion. 

"Old Aunt Peet's passed away," he informed me briskly.  "She had a shock, and went right off sudden yisterday fore-noon.  I'm about now tendin' to the funeral 'rangements.  She's b'en extry smart, they say, all winter, — out to meetin' last Sabbath; never enjoyed herself so complete as she has this past month.  She'd b'en a vary hard-workin' woman.  Her folks was glad to have her there, and give her every attention.  The place here never was good for nothin'.  The old gen'leman, — uncle, you know, — he wore hisself out tryin' to make a livin' off from it." 

There was an ostentatious sympathy and half-suppressed excitement from bad news which were quite lost upon us, and we did not linger to hear much more.  It seemed to me as if I had known Mrs. Peet better than any one else had known her.  I had counted upon seeing her again, and hearing her own account of Shrewsbury life, its pleasures and its limitations.  I wonder what has become of the cat and the contents of the faded bundle-handkerchief.                               *Sarah Orne Jewett.*
 

     