---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Tom's Husband
source: 
---

      
# Jewett, Sarah Orne.  "Tom's Husband." *Atlantic Monthly* 49 (Feb. 1882): 205-213.

  I SHALL not dwell long upon the circumstances that led to the marriage of my hero and heroine; though their courtship was, to them, the only one that has ever noticeably approached the ideal, it had many aspects in which it was entirely commonplace in other people's eyes.  While the world in general smiles at lovers with kindly approval and sympathy, it refuses to be aware of the unprecedented delight which is amazing to the lovers themselves.

 But, as has been true in many other cases, when they were at last married, the most ideal of situations was found to have been changed to the most practical.  Instead of having shared their original duties, and, as school-boys would say, going halves, they discovered that the cares of life had been doubled.  This led to some distressing moments for both our friends; they understood suddenly that instead of dwelling in heaven they were still upon earth, and had made themselves slaves to new laws and limitations.  Instead of being freer and happier than ever before, they had assumed new responsibilities; they had established a new household, and must fulfill in some way or another the obligations of it.  They looked back with affection to their engagement; they had been longing to have each other to themselves, apart from the world, but it seemed that they never felt so keenly that they were still units in modern society.  Since Adam and Eve were in Paradise, before the devil joined them, nobody has had a chance to imitate that unlucky couple.  In some respects they told the truth when, twenty times a day, they said that life had never been so pleasant before; but there were mental reservations on either side which might have subjected them to the accusation of lying. Somehow, there was a little feeling of disappointment, and they caught themselves wondering — though they would have died sooner than confess it —  whether they were quite so happy as they had expected.  The truth was, they were much happier than people usually are, for they had an uncommon capacity for enjoyment.  For a little while they were like a sail-boat that is beating and has to drift a few    minutes before it can catch the wind and start off on the other tack. And they had the same feeling, too, that any one is likely to have who has been long pursuing some object of his ambition or desire. Whether it is a coin, or a picture, or a stray volume of some old edition of Shakespeare, or whether it is an office under government or a lover, when it is fairly in one's grasp there is a loss of the eagerness that was felt in pursuit.  Satisfaction, even after one has dined well, is not so interesting and eager a feeling as hunger.

  My hero and heroine were reasonably well established to begin with: they each had some money, though Mr. Wilson had most.  His father had at one time been a rich man, but with the decline, a few years before, of manufacturing interests, he had become, mostly through the fault of others, somewhat involved; and at the time of his death his affairs were in such a condition that it was still a question whether a very large sum or a moderately large one would represent his estate.  Mrs. Wilson, Tom's step-mother, was somewhat of an invalid; she suffered severely at times with asthma, but she was almost entirely relieved by living in another part of the country. While her husband lived, she had accepted her illness as inevitable, and had rarely left home; but during the last few years she had lived in Philadelphia with her own people, making short and wheezing visits only from time to time, and had not undergone a voluntary period of suffering since the occasion of Tom's marriage, which she had entirely approved.  She had a sufficient property of her own, and she and Tom were independent of each other in that way.  Her only other step-child was a daughter, who had married a navy officer, and had at this time gone out to spend three years (or less) with her husband, who had been ordered to Japan.

 It is not unfrequently noticed that in many marriages one of the persons who choose each other as partners for life is said to have thrown himself or herself away, and the relatives and friends look on with dismal forebodings and ill-concealed submission.  In this case it was the wife who might have done so much better, according to public opinion.  She did not think so herself, luckily, either before marriage or afterward, and I do not think it occurred to her to picture to herself the sort of career which would have been her alternative. She had been an only child, and had usually taken her own way. Some one once said that it was a great pity that she had not been obliged to work for her living, for she had inherited a most uncommon business talent, and, without being disreputably keen at a bargain, her insight into the practical working of affairs was very clear and far-reaching.  Her father, who had also been a manufacturer, like Tom's, had often said it had been a mistake that she was a girl instead of a boy.  Such executive ability as hers is often wasted in the more contracted sphere of women, and is apt to be more a disadvantage than a help.  She was too independent and self-reliant for a wife; it would seem at first thought that she needed a wife herself more than she did a husband.  Most men like best the women whose natures cling and appeal to theirs for protection.  But Tom Wilson, while he did not wish to be protected himself, liked these very qualities in his wife which would have displeased some other men; to tell the truth, he was very much in love with his wife just as she was.  He was a successful collector of almost everything but money, and during a great part of his life he had been an invalid, and he had grown, as he laughingly confessed, very old-womanish.  He had been badly lamed, when a boy, by being caught in some machinery in his father's mill, near which he was idling one afternoon, and though he had almost entirely out-grown the effect of his injury, it had not   been until after many years.  He had been in college, but his eyes had given out there, and he had been obliged to leave in the middle of his junior year, though he had kept up a pleasant intercourse with the members of his class, with whom he had been a great favorite.  He was a good deal of an idler in the world.  I do not think his ambition, except in the case of securing Mary Dunn for his wife, had ever been distinct; he seemed to make the most he could of each day as it came, without making all his days' works tend toward some grand result, and go toward the upbuilding of some grand plan and purpose. He consequently gave no promise of being either distinguished or great.  When his eyes would allow, he was an indefatigable reader; and although he would have said that he read only for amusement, yet he amused himself with books that were well worth the time he spent over them.

 The house where he lived nominally belonged to his step-mother, but she had taken for granted that Tom would bring his wife home to it, and assured him that it should be to all intents and purposes his.  Tom was deeply attached to the old place, which was altogether the pleasantest in town.  He had kept bachelor's hall there most of the time since his father's death, and he had taken great pleasure, before his marriage, in refitting it to some extent, though it was already comfortable and furnished in remarkably good taste. People said of him that if it had not been for his illnesses, and if he had been a poor boy, he probably would have made something of himself.  As it was, he was not very well known by the towns-people, being somewhat reserved, and not taking much interest in their every-day subjects of conversation.  Nobody liked him so well as they liked his wife, yet there was no reason why he should be disliked enough to have much said about it.

 After our friends had been married for some time, and had outlived the first strangeness of the new order of things, and had done their duty to their neighbors with so much apparent willingness and generosity that even Tom himself was liked a great deal better than he ever had been before, they were sitting together one stormy evening in the library, before the fire.  Mrs. Wilson had been reading Tom the letters which had come to him by the night's mail.  There was a long one from his sister in Nagasaki, which had been written with a good deal of ill-disguised reproach.  She complained of the smallness of the income of her share in her father's estate, and said that she had been assured by American friends that the smaller mills were starting up everywhere, and beginning to do well again.  Since so much of their money was invested in the factory, she had been surprised and sorry to find by Tom's last letters that he had seemed to have no idea of putting in a proper person as superintendent, and going to work again.  Four per cent. on her other property, instead of eight, which she had been told she must soon expect, would make a great difference to her.  A navy captain in a foreign port was obliged to entertain a great deal, and Tom must know that it cost them much more to live than it did him, and ought to think of their interests. She hoped he would talk over what was best to be done with their mother (who had been made executor, with Tom, of his father's will).

 Tom laughed a little, but looked disturbed.  His wife had said something to the same effect, and his mother had spoken once or twice in her letters of the prospect of starting the mill again.  He was not a bit of a business man, and he did not feel certain, with the theories which he had arrived at of the state of the country, that it was safe yet to spend the money which would have to be spent in putting the mill in order.  "They think that the minute it is going      again we shall be making money hand over hand, just as father did when we were children," he said.  "It is going to cost us no end of money before we can make anything.  Before father died he meant to put in a good deal of new machinery, I remember.  I don't know anything about the business myself, and I would have sold out long ago if I had had an offer that came anywhere near the value.  The larger mills are the only ones that are good for anything now, and we should have to bring a crowd of French Canadians here; the day is past for the people who live in this part of the country to go into the factory again.  Even the Irish all go West when they come into the country, and don't come to places like this any more."

 "But there are a good many of the old work-people down in the village," said Mrs. Wilson.  "Jack Towne asked me the other day if you weren't going to start up in the spring."

 Tom moved uneasily in his chair.  "I'll put you in for superintendent, if you like," he said, half angrily, whereupon Mary threw the newspaper at him; but by the time he had thrown it back he was in good humor again.

 "Do you know, Tom," she said, with amazing seriousness, "that I believe I should like nothing in the world so much as to be the head of a large business?  I hate keeping house, — I always did; and I never did so much of it in all my life put together as I have since I have been married.  I suppose it isn't womanly to say so, but if I could escape from the whole thing I believe I should be perfectly happy.  If you get rich when the mill is going again, I shall beg for a housekeeper, and shirk everything.  I give you fair warning.  I don't believe I keep this house half so well as you did before I came here."

 Tom's eyes twinkled.  "I am going to have that glory, — I don't think you do, Polly; but you can't say that I have not been forbearing. I certainly have not told you more than twice how we used to have things cooked.  I'm not going to be your kitchen-colonel."

 "Of course it seemed the proper thing to do," said his wife, meditatively; "but I think we should have been even happier than we have if I had been spared it.  I have had some days of wretchedness that I shudder to think of.  I never know what to have for breakfast; and I ought not to say it, but I don't mind the sight of dust.  I look upon housekeeping as my life's great discipline;" and at this pathetic confession they both laughed heartily.

 "I've a great mind to take it off your hands," said Tom.  "I always rather liked it, to tell the truth, and I ought to be a better housekeeper, — I have been at it for five years; though housekeeping for one is different from what it is for two, and one of them a woman.  You see you have brought a different element into my family.  Luckily, the servants are pretty well drilled.  I do think you upset them a good deal at first!"

 Mary Wilson smiled as if she only half heard what he was saying. She drummed with her foot on the floor and looked intently at the fire, and presently gave it a vigorous poking.  "Well?" said Tom, after he had waited patiently as long as he could.

 "Tom!  I'm going to propose something to you.  I wish you would really do as you said, and take all the home affairs under your care, and let me start the mill.  I am certain I could manage it.  Of course I should get people who understood the thing to teach me.  I believe I was made for it; I should like it above all things.  And this is what I will do: I will bear the cost of starting it, myself, — I think I have money enough, or can get it; and if I have not put affairs in the right trim at the end of a year I will stop, and you may make some other arrangement.  If I have, you and your mother and sister can pay me back."

   "So I am going to be the wife, and you the husband," said Tom, a little indignantly; "at least, that is what people will say.  It's a regular Darby and Joan affair, and you think you can do more work in a day than I can do in three.  Do you know that you must go to town to buy cotton?  And do you know there are a thousand things about it that you don't know?"

 "And never will?" said Mary, with perfect good humor. "Why, Tom, I can learn as well as you, and a good deal better, for I like business, and you don't.  You forget that I was always father's right-hand man after I was a dozen years old, and that you have let me invest my money and some of your own, and I haven't made a blunder yet."

 Tom thought that his wife had never looked so handsome or so happy.  "I don't care, I should rather like the fun of knowing what people will say.  It is a new departure, at any rate.  Women think they can do everything better than men in these days, but I'm the first man, apparently, who has wished he were a woman."

 "Of course people will laugh," said Mary, "but they will say that it's just like me, and think I am fortunate to have married a man who will let me do as I choose.  I don't see why it isn't sensible: you will be living exactly as you were before you married, as to home affairs; and since it was a good thing for you to know something about housekeeping then, I can't imagine why you shouldn't go on with it now, since it makes me miserable, and I am wasting a fine business talent while I do it.  What do we care for people's talking about it?"

 "It seems to me that it is something like women's smoking: it isn't wicked, but it isn't the custom of the country.  And I don't like the idea of your going among business men.  Of course I should be above going with you, and having people think I must be an idiot; they would say that you married a manufacturing interest, and I was thrown in.  I can foresee that my pride is going to be humbled to the dust in every way," Tom declared in mournful tones, and began to shake with laughter.  "It is one of your lovely castles in the air, dear Polly, but an old brick mill needs a better foundation than the clouds. No, I'll look around, and get an honest man with a few select brains for agent.  I suppose it's the best thing we can do, for the machinery ought not to lie still any longer; but I mean to sell the factory as soon as I can.  I devoutly wish it would take fire, for the insurance would be the best price we are likely to get.  That is a famous letter from Alice!  I am afraid the captain has been growling over his pay, or they have been giving too many little dinners on board ship.  If we were rid of the mill, you and I might go out there this winter.  It would be capital fun."

 Mary smiled again in an absent-minded way.  Tom had an uneasy feeling that he had not heard the end of it yet, but nothing more was said for a day or two.  When Mrs. Tom Wilson announced, with no apparent thought of being contradicted, that she had entirely made up her mind, and she meant to see those men who had been overseers of the different departments, who still lived in the village, and have the mill put in order at once, Tom looked disturbed, but made no opposition; and soon after breakfast his wife formally presented him with a handful of keys, and told him there was meat enough in the house for dinner; and presently he heard the wheels of her little phaeton rattling off down the road.  I should be untruthful if I tried to persuade any one that he was not provoked; he thought she would at least have waited for his formal permission, and at first he meant to take another horse, and chase her, and bring her back in disgrace, and put a stop to      the whole thing. But something assured him that she knew what she was about, and he determined to let her have her own way.  If she failed, it might do no harm, and this was the only ungallant thought he gave her.  He was sure that she would do nothing unladylike, or be unmindful of his dignity; and he believed it would be looked upon as one of her odd, independent freaks, which always had won respect in the end, however much they had been laughed at in the beginning.  "Susan," said he, as that estimable person went by the door with the dust-pan, "you may tell Catherine to come to me for orders about the house, and you may do so yourself.  I am going to take charge again, as I did before I was married.  It is no trouble to me, and Mrs. Wilson dislikes it.  Besides, she is going into business, and will have a great deal else to think of."

 "Yes, sir; very well, sir," said Susan, who was suddenly moved to ask so many questions that she was utterly silent.  But her master looked very happy; there was evidently no disapproval of his wife; and she went on up the stairs, and began to sweep them down, knocking the dust-brush about excitedly, as if she were trying to kill a descending colony of insects.

 Tom went out to the stable and mounted his horse, which had been waiting for him to take his customary after-breakfast ride to the post-office, and he galloped down the road in quest of the phaeton. He saw Mary talking with Jack Towne, who had been an overseer and a valued workman of his father's.  He was looking much surprised and pleased.

 "I wasn't caring so much about getting work, myself," he explained; "I've got what will carry me and my wife through; but it'll be better for the young folks about here to work near home.  My nephews are wanting something to do; they were going to Lynn next week.  I don't say but I should like to be to work in the old place again.  I've sort of missed it, since we shut down."

 "I'm sorry I was so long in overtaking you," said Tom, politely, to his wife.  "Well, Jack, did Mrs. Wilson tell you she's going to start the mill?  You must give her all the help you can."

 "'Deed I will," said Mr. Towne, gallantly, without a bit of astonishment.

 "I don't know much about the business yet," said Mrs. Wilson, who had been a little overcome at Jack Towne's lingo of the different rooms and machinery, and who felt an overpowering sense of having a great deal before her in the next few weeks.  "By the time the mill is ready, I will be ready, too," she said, taking heart a little; and Tom, who was quick to understand her moods, could not help laughing, as he rode alongside.  "We want a new barrel of flour, Tom, dear," she said, by way of punishment for his untimely mirth.

 If she lost courage in the long delay, or was disheartened at the steady call for funds, she made no sign; and after a while the mill started up, and her cares were lightened, so that she told Tom that before next pay day she would like to go to Boston for a few days, and go to the theatre, and have a frolic and a rest.  She really looked pale and thin, and she said she never worked so hard in all her life; but nobody knew how happy she was, and she was so glad she had married Tom, for some men would have laughed at it.

 "I laughed at it," said Tom, meekly.  "All is, if I don't cry by and by, because I am a beggar, I shall be lucky."  But Mary looked fearlessly serene, and said that there was no danger at present.

  It would have been ridiculous to expect a dividend the first year, though the Nagasaki people were pacified with difficulty.  All the business letters came to Tom's address, and everybody who was not directly concerned thought that he was the motive power of the re-   awakened enterprise.  Sometimes business people came to the mill, and were amazed at having to confer with Mrs. Wilson, but they soon had to respect her talents and her success.  She was helped by the old clerk, who had been promptly recalled and reinstated, and she certainly did capitally well.  She was laughed at, as she had expected to be, and people said they should think Tom would be ashamed of himself; but it soon appeared that he was not to blame, and what reproach was offered was on the score of his wife's oddity.  There was nothing about the mill that she did not understand before very long, and at the end of the second year she declared a small dividend with great pride and triumph.  And she was congratulated on her success, and every one thought of her project in a different way from the way they had thought of it in the beginning.  She had singularly good fortune: at the end of the third year she was making money for herself and her friends faster than most people were, and approving letters began to come from Nagasaki.  The Ashtons had been ordered to stay in that region, and it was evident that they were continually being obliged to entertain more instead of less.  Their children were growing fast too, and constantly becoming more expensive.  The captain and his wife had already begun to congratulate themselves secretly that their two sons would in all probability come into possession, one day, of their uncle Tom's handsome property.

 For a good while Tom enjoyed life, and went on his quiet way serenely.  He was anxious at first, for he thought that Mary was going to make ducks and drakes of his money and her own.  And then he did not exactly like the looks of the thing, either; he feared that his wife was growing successful as a business person at the risk of losing her womanliness.  But as time went on, and he found there was no fear of that, he accepted the situation philosophically.  He gave up his collection of engravings, having become more interested in one of coins and medals, which took up most of his leisure time.  He often went to the city in pursuit of such treasures, and gained much renown in certain quarters as a numismatologist of great skill and experience. But at last his house (which had almost kept itself, and had given him little to do beside ordering the dinners, while faithful old Catherine and her niece Susan were his aids) suddenly became a great care to him.  Catherine, who had been the main-stay of the family for many years, died after a short illness, and Susan must needs choose that time, of all others, for being married to one of the second hands in the mill.  There followed a long and dismal season of experimenting, and for a long time there was a procession of incapable creatures going in at one kitchen door and out of the other.  His wife would not have liked to say so, but it seemed to her that Tom was growing fussy about the house affairs, and took more notice of those minor details than he used.  She wished more than once, when she was tired, that he would not talk so much about the housekeeping; he seemed sometimes to have no other thought.

 In the first of Mrs. Wilson's connection with manufacturing, she had made it a rule to consult Tom on every subject of importance; but it had speedily proved to be a formality.  He tried manfully to show a deep interest which he did not feel, and his wife gave up, little by little, telling him much about her affairs.  She said that she liked to drop business when she came home in the evening; and at last she fell into the habit of taking a nap on the library sofa, while Tom, who could not use his eyes much by lamp-light, sat smoking or in utter idleness before the fire.  When they were first married his wife had made it a rule that she should al-   ways read him the evening papers, and afterward they had always gone on with some book of history or philosophy, in which they were both interested. These evenings of their early married life had been charming to both of them, and from time to time one would say to the other that they ought to take up again the habit of reading together.  Mary was so unaffectedly tired in the evening that Tom never liked to propose a walk; for, though he was not a man of peculiarly social nature, he had always been accustomed to pay an occasional evening visit to his neighbors in the village.  And though he had little interest in the business world, and still less knowledge of it, after a while he wished that his wife would have more to say about what she was planning and doing, or how things were getting on.  He thought that her chief aid, old Mr. Jackson, was far more in her thoughts than he.  She was forever quoting Jackson's opinions.  He did not like to find that she took it for granted that he was not interested in the welfare of his own property; it made him feel like a sort of pensioner and dependent, though, when they had guests at the house, which was by no means seldom, there was nothing in her manner that would imply that she thought herself in any way the head of the family.  It was hard work to find fault with his wife in any way, though, to give him his due, he rarely tried. 

 But, this being a wholly unnatural state of things, the reader must expect to hear of its change at last, and the first blow from the enemy was dealt by an old woman, who lived near by, and who called to Tom one morning, as he was driving down to the village in a great hurry (to post a letter, which ordered his agent to secure a long-wished-for ancient copper coin, at any price), to ask him if they had made yeast that week, and if she could borrow a cupful, as her own had met with some misfortune.  Tom was instantly in a rage, and he mentally condemned her to some undeserved fate, but told her aloud to go and see the cook.  This slight delay, besides being killing to his dignity, caused him to lose the mail, and in the end his much-desired copper coin.  It was a hard day for him, altogether; it was Wednesday, and the first days of the week having been stormy the washing was very late.  And Mary came home to dinner provokingly good-natured.  She had met an old school-mate and her husband driving home from the mountains, and had first taken them over her factory, to their great amusement and delight, and then had brought them home to dinner.  Tom greeted them cordially, and manifested his usual graceful hospitality; but the minute he saw his wife alone he said in a plaintive tone of rebuke, "I should think you might have remembered that the girls are unusually busy to-day.  I do wish you would take a little interest in things at home.  The girls have been washing, and I'm sure I don't know what sort of a dinner we can give your friends.  I wish you had thought to bring home some steak. I have been busy myself, and couldn't go down to the village.  I thought we would only have a lunch."

 Mary was hungry, but she said nothing, except that it would be all right, — she didn't mind; and perhaps they could have some canned soup.

 She often went to town to buy or look at cotton, or to see some improvement in machinery, and she brought home beautiful bits of furniture and new pictures for the house, and showed a touching thoughtfulness in remembering Tom's fancies; but somehow he had an uneasy suspicion that she could get along pretty well without him when it came to the deeper wishes and hopes of her life, and that her most important concerns were all matters in which he had no share. He seemed to himself to have merged his life in his wife's;     he lost his interest in things outside the house and grounds; he felt himself fast growing rusty and behind the times, and to have somehow missed a good deal in life; he felt that he was a failure.  One day the thought rushed over him that his had been almost exactly the experience of most women, and he wondered if it really was any more disappointing and ignominious to him than it was to women themselves.  "Some of them may be contented with it," he said to himself, soberly.  "People think women are designed for such careers by nature, but I don't know why I ever made such a fool of myself."

 Having once seen his situation in life from such a stand-point, he felt it day by day to be more degrading, and he wondered what he should do about it; and once, drawn by a new, strange sympathy, he went to the little family burying-ground.  It was one of the mild, dim days that come sometimes in early November, when the pale sunlight is like the pathetic smile of a sad face, and he sat for a long time on the limp, frost-bitten grass beside his mother's grave.

 But when he went home in the twilight his step-mother, who just then was making them a little visit, mentioned that she had been looking through some boxes of hers that had been packed long before and stowed away in the garret.  "Everything looks very nice up there," she said, in her wheezing voice (which, worse than usual that day, always made him nervous); and added, without any intentional slight to his feelings, "I do think you have always been a most excellent housekeeper."

 "I'm tired of such nonsense!" he exclaimed, with surprising indignation.  "Mary, I wish you to arrange your affairs so that you can leave them for six months at least.  I am going to spend this winter in Europe."

 "Why, Tom, dear!" said his wife, appealingly.  "I couldn't leave my business any way in the" — 

 But she caught sight of a look on his usually placid countenance that was something more than decision, and refrained from saying anything more.

 And three weeks from that day they sailed.

 *Sarah Orne Jewett.*

     