---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Omaha, the Prairie City
source: 
---

                   
#  Lighton, William R.  "Omaha, the Prairie City."  *Atlantic  Monthly* 89 (1902): 545-554.

   -      "Rare are the buttons on a Roman's breeches,
  -      In antiquarian eyes surpassing riches:
  -      Rare is each crack'd, black, rotten earthen dish,
  -      That held of ancient Rome the flesh and fish."
     THUS wrote Peter Pindar; and Dr. Holmes, in kindred mood, said  that "fifty years make everything hopelessly old-fashioned, without  giving it the charm of real antiquity.  There are too many  talkative old people who remember all about that time; and at best  half a century is a half-baked bit of ware."  

It was a little chilling to have memory thrust forward those  sayings at the moment of starting to write about Omaha, which is a  half-century town.  But memory furnished also a remedy for the  chill, in the observation of Bacon, that "a Man that is young in  Yeares, may be Old in Houres, if he have lost no Time."  Omaha has  lost no time.  In the first part of the year 1854 there was not the  first premonitory symptom of a town; now there is a city of more  than one hundred thousand inhabitants, and within a radius of ten  miles the people number nearly a quarter of a million.  If we  measure by the scale of contrasts, we may well say that the city  had its beginning in a remote antiquity.  

It is doubtful when white men first set foot upon this soil.   In 1673 Father Marquette accurately mapped the confluence of the  Platte and Missouri rivers; but his map was drawn "upon information  and belief," as the lawyers say.  He got his data from the Indians.   Probably the earliest authentic map of this region to be drawn from  actual knowledge was that made by Lewis and Clark, who were here in  1804.  But long before the coming of Lewis and Clark the skirmish  line of civilization had passed the mouth of the Platte, and moved  on into the northwestern wilderness.  The skirmishers made a motley  crowd, of mixed motives and interests, — Jesuit missionaries,  hunters, trappers, agents of the fur companies, Indian traders, and  on down the scale to mere restless-footed adventurers.  Some  wandering Frenchmen had entered the Missouri country by way of  Canada and the Great Lakes; they had formed trading compacts with  many of the Indian tribes, and some had entered into conjugal  misalliances with Indian women.  The effects of those unions can be  traced to this day, if one cares to take the trouble.  In Astoria  Irving tells of one Dorion, who had associated himself more or less  intimately with several bands, and who had as his "habitual wife"  a Sioux squaw.  That was not an exceptional case; there were many  like Dorion, although few left legible records of their doings.  

The Canadian French formed but a part of the pioneer  stragglers.  it is probable that the Missouri itself was the main-traveled avenue of that early incursion; for the waterway offered  the easiest approach to the country, and also the easiest means for  carrying away the plunder of traffic.  More than a century ago, the  American Fur Company, whose headquarters were at St. Louis,  established trading posts at many places upon the Upper Missouri.   But these were not towns in any sense of the word.  That was not a  time for town-building.  

It was the gold excitement of 1849 that first brought the  whites to this part of the West in considerable numbers, and  resulted in the planting of the first permanent settlements.  The  lands beyond the Missouri were then in possession of the Indians,  and the only right the whites enjoyed was to pass peacefully over  the trail that led up the valley of the Platte.  But Iowa had been  ceded to civilization, and upon the eastern bank of the Missouri  there grew     up a few rudimentary towns that were engaged in  "outfitting" the gold hunters for their trip across the plains.   Amongst all such seats of traffic there was hot rivalry for  preeminence.  In this neighborhood the most successful in that  struggle was the place first known as Kanesville, which was  afterward absorbed into the present city of Council Bluffs,  directly opposite Omaha.  After a little time Kanesville became the  metropolis of the Salt Lake trail, and attracted to itself a great  host of adventurers of all sorts, — just the kind of populace that  is now swarming in the camps and towns that supply the Klondike and  the Cape Nome country.  Every mother's son was in quest of sudden  and great wealth.  

But they were not all men of the moment, content with the  moment's opportunities.  Some were mindful of the time when the  broad prairies beyond the river would be opened for settlement, and  when Fortune would strike into a swifter pace.  Men of that stripe  will always feel themselves handicapped by even a fictitious  limitation upon their activity.  The men of Kanesville chafed under  the law which kept them from Nebraska soil.  That restriction was  soon removed.  The Kansas-Nebraska Bill was signed by Franklin  Pierce on May 30, 1854.  The more enterprising ones of Council  Bluffs had surreptitiously "located" a town site on the new soil  many months in advance of authority; that is, they had selected a  likely place, and were awaiting only the conclusion of formalities  before taking open possession.  The date fixed for the incoming of  settlers was early in July, 1854, and the freshly glorified Fourth  was celebrated in the new-made Omaha City.  

There were strong differences between the motives of the  Kansans and the Nebraskans.  The opening of Kansas put the nation  into a passion; the opening of Nebraska did little more than to  stimulate commercial activity.  Kansas stood for a conflict of  ideas and for a conquest by blood; Nebraska stood for an every-day  sort of neighborliness, for peaceful settlement and home-making,  and for a conquest by simple business sagacity.  Yet the beginning  of Nebraska was picturesque in the extreme, with rose-hued romance  and dun-colored actuality inextricably intertwined.  Not a foot of  railroad had been built in Iowa, and there was no communication  with the world save as wagon trains or horsemen came straggling  over the Iowa trails, or as the half-tramp boats struggled up the  uncertain river from St. Louis.  The new land was then more remote  than is any part of our nation to-day; yet the people lacked  nothing that would make them equal to their life.  It was a society  sufficient unto itself, having its own localized ideas and purposes  and its own mode for working out its salvation.  Closer proximity  to the established institutions of civilization would hardly have  helped the movement; it would have been more likely to hinder, by  damping the frank ingenuousness of the impulse.  Nebraska was very  well off in those days, although the people did some unwise and  even grotesque things.  The first of all matters to engage their  attention was the building of a legion of towns.  Wherever a  ferryboat touched the western bank of the stream it made the soil  pregnant, and there a town quickened.  

Towns, no less than states or nations, must have some reason  for being; the birth of a hamlet is no more fortuitous than the  birth of an empire.  Nevertheless, it is hard to give a just reason  for the beginning of Omaha.  There seems to be but one word for  it, — the overworked American word "enterprise."  Other towns — many  Western towns — have sprung from an exalted thought, and been  nourished by the blood of sacrifice.  Omaha had no such experience.   The mother of Omaha was Expediency; among its founders there were  no martyrs to a great social cause, but there     was a good  general average of manly honor and faithfulness to the plain duties  of every day; the settlement was not led by eminent captains of  industry or commerce, but the rank and file of the settlers held  many clear-sighted, stout-hearted traders and workers.  Omaha owed  its establishment, as it has owed the best of its later growth to  the multiplication of the simple arts of peace and to a commonalty  of well-being.  It was a beginning almost commonplace, — almost, but  not quite.  The element of romance averted commonplaceness.  From  an early history I quote this description of the first house that  was built here: —   

"The house was of round logs, and stood on the corner of  Jackson and Twelfth streets.  It was intended for a town house, and  being the general headquarters for a time, was known under the name  of the 'St. Nicholas.'  Here those who had claims would congregate  in the evenings; cook their bacon, corn bread, and coffee in the  centre of the room, where a portion of the puncheon floor had been  removed for a fireplace, and sing songs and pass away the evening.   Later, one Johnson pitched a tent on the corner of Cass and  Thirteenth streets, which was in time supplanted by a sod-and-board  shanty, that was named the 'Big Six,' where the first saloon was  established, to which the town-house men would often pay a visit,  wading through grass knee-deep."  

Omaha was already claiming a population of hundreds; but those  hundreds were actually living in Council Bluffs, awaiting the time  when walls and roofs could be built.  Before the town had any real  existence a postmaster was appointed; and when it was but three  weeks old, and while the postmaster was carrying the mail about  with him in the crown of his hat, a newspaper was established!   Twelve issues make a complete file of that baby newspaper.  I quote  from the initial editorial: —   

"Well, strangers, friends, patrons, and good people generally,  wherever in the wide world your lot may be cast, here we are upon  Nebraska soil, seated upon the stump of an ancient oak, which  serves for an editorial chair, and with the top of our badly abused  beaver hat for a table, we propose inditing a leader for the Omaha  Arrow. . . .  There sticks our axe in the trunk of an old oak whose  branches have for years been fanned by the breezes that constantly  sweep from over the ofttimes flower-dotted prairie lea, and from  which we propose making a log for our cabin. . . .  The pioneering  squatter and the uncivilized red men are our constituents and  neighbors, the wolves and deer our traveling companions, and the  wild birds and prairie winds our musicians. . . .  

"Last night we slept in our sanctum, the starry-decked heaven  for a ceiling, and our mother earth for a floor.  It was a glorious  night, and we were tired from the day's exertions.  Far away on  different portions of the prairie glimmered the camp fires of our  neighbors, the Pawnees, Omahas, or that noble and too often  unappreciated class of our people known as pioneers or squatters.   We gathered around our little camp fire, talked of times in the  past, of the pleasing present, and of the glorious future which the  march of civilization should open in the land whereon we sat. . .  .  Behind us was spread our buffalo robe in an old Indian trail,  which was to serve as our bed.  The cool night wind swept in  cooling breezes around us, deep-laden with the perfume of a  thousand-hued and various flowers.  Far away upon our lee came the  occasional long-drawn howl of the prairie wolves.  Talk of comfort!   There was more of it in one hour of our sanctum camp life upon  Nebraska soil than in a whole life of fashionable pampered world in  the settlements."  

Neither in the town nor in the territory had government taken  form; the     citizens were administering their affairs in  something like committee of the whole; yet life was fairly orderly  and decent, simply because the people wished to have it so.  

A governor was appointed for the territory, but he did not  arrive upon the scene until October.  Then he stopped at Bellevue,  a town twelve miles below Omaha, meaning to make that place the  seat of the territorial government; but he died three weeks later,  and the territorial secretary, who became acting governor, brought  the capital to Omaha, where it remained until 1867, when Nebraska  was admitted to statehood.  At the first session of the legislature  the question of the permanent location of the capital aroused no  little bitterness.  Every town upon the new soil was clamorous to  be chosen.  "The excitement was very great at times," wrote an  early historian.  "The lobbies were once crowded with the  respective parties to the contest, armed with bludgeons, brickbats,  and pistols.  A fight was thought to be imminent, but it did not  occur. . . .  The elections were eminently farcical, owing to the  fact that many districts where white men had never slept more than  one night were represented by members who talked loudly of their  'constituents.'"  

At some time in the winter of 1854-55 the dead governor was  succeeded by an appointee from Arkansas, one Mark W. Izard.  Here  is the story of the inaugural ball: —   

"The rooms had a single coat of what was then called  plastering, composed of frozen mud, and a very thin coating at  that.  The floor was rough and unplaned, and had been energetically  scrubbed for the occasion; but the night being dreadfully cold, and  the heating apparatus failing to warm the room, the water froze  upon the floor and could not be melted.  Rough cottonwood boards on  either side of the room were substitutes for chairs.  

"The hour of seven having arrived, the grand company began to  assemble.  Long before the appointed hour his Arkansas Excellency  appeared in the dancing hall. . . .  Izard was the guest of nine  ladies, who were all that could be mustered, even for a state  occasion, in Omaha.  Two of the ladies could not dance, and their  places were supplied by gentlemen. . . .  Jim Orton was the  solitary fiddler, occupying the corner of the room. . . .  The  supper came off about midnight, and consisted of coffee with brown  sugar, but no milk, sandwiches of a peculiar size, very thick, and  made up of a singular mixture of bread of radical complexion, and  bacon.  This menu was supplemented with dried-apple pie; and there  being no tables in those days, it was 'passed around.'  The  governor, being from a warmer climate, stood around shivering with  the cold, but bore himself with amiable fortitude, buoyed up by the  honors thus showered upon him; and at the proper time, under a deep  sense of his own consequence, made a speech returning thanks for  the high honors done him."  

Such was the beginning.  In July, 1855, Omaha had about 200  residents; in 1857 this number had increased to about 1800, and  then, for the first time an orderly government by statutes and law  officers was put into effect.  It was not until the latter year  that any consistent attempt was made to develop the outlying farm  lands.  A land office was then established; before that time it had  been impossible for a settler to get title to his acres.  After  those three formless years there was organization and the beginning  of progress.  Churches and schools were built; there was a public  library of 4000 volumes, and a citizens' association provided a  course of ten lectures for the benefit of a library fund; the  federal government was erecting a substantial building, to cost  $100,000; $50,000 had been expended in constructing a military road  to connect Omaha     with Fort Kearney, and there was an  appropriation of $400,000 for building a wagon road to South Pass  that was to place the town in commercial communication with the  great West.  All this in three years.  

The panic of 1857 affected the newer districts no less than  the old, — not by wrecking fortunes already amassed, but by  retarding development.  One of the most serious effects was in the  delay of railroad-building.  Beginning with the work of Fremont,  numberless surveys had been made for a Pacific railway, and  numberless construction companies had been organized for carrying  on the work.  National aid was for a long time denied, and the  building of the Union Pacific was not begun until 1863.  The road  was completed in May, 1869; and in the meantime three great railway  systems had extended their lines across Iowa.  That was the  beginning of modern Omaha, as it was the beginning of the modern  West.  From that time to the present, material progress has  suffered no serious checks but such as have been imposed by the  erratic moods of the people themselves.  

Omaha stands for the life of the prairies, to which it owes  its own life; its past and future must be read not alone in the  temper and inclinations of its own corporate citizens, but also in  the motives of the men who have been engaged in turning the wild  prairies into farms and gardens.  For the purpose of measurement  and valuation it must not be isolated; it must be considered as  merely an integral part of the middle Missouri country.  It is not  a cosmopolitan city, — in the nature of things it cannot be; at its  greatest and best it must be and remain a farm town, with all that  that implies.  Consider that within a circle of seven hundred miles  or more in diameter, with Omaha as the centre, there is practically  no source of wealth save in crops and herds.  No country hamlet of  the region is more truly the creature of the farms.  Those partial  disasters which the city has experienced have resulted from its  failure to see or to acknowledge its dependence.  The people have  nursed some leaping ambitions, and have tried to ignore the  inevitable; but they have had to pay the price down to the last  decimal.  

Readers will remember that in the years from 1885 to 1890 the  middle West was in travail with a "boom."  Both city and country  were involved, but in different degrees.  In its relation to the  farm lands the boom was little more than a passing delusion; in  very many towns and cities it amounted to a frenzy of false views  and attitudes.  The people of Omaha then fancied that they could  read clear their title to a vague immensity, and adopted a course  of behavior that has flavored every succeeding year with  bitterness.  The corporate limits of the town were greatly  enlarged, and the surrounding prairies broke out in a rash of  pretentious "additions."  Quiet cornfields that lay ten miles from  the heart of things were surveyed and platted into town lots, which  were sold for a hundred times their real value.  It does not appear  that any one was willing to show disloyalty to his fellows by  questioning the future; and so the process of booming was continued  until the frenzy was spent by its own force.  Of course there was  no good reason for such conduct, — no shadow of reason save in an  ill-considered desire for an unearned greatness.

    -                               "We may outrun,
  -      By violent swiftness, that which we run at,
  -      And lose by over running."
    That proved to be exactly true in the case of Omaha.  It outran  sober judgment, sound sense, and all the virtues of that old-fashioned class, until there was real danger that it would be "like  a candle ill made, that smothers the splendor of a happy fortune in  its own grease."  The boom did not consist only in inflation of  real estate values; it went     much farther.  There was a  craze for wholesale inflation; most of all, a craze for a big  population.  As other places have thought, so thought Omaha, that  if only enough people came in there would be a great city.   Thousands of people and millions of money were sucked into that  maelstrom of insanity.  But means of support cannot be provided by  mere enthusiasm, however honest.  The city of Omaha makes its  living only as a sort of corporate middleman for the tenants of the  tributary farms; and as this business is limited to a certain  volume, its profits will not support an unlimited number, no matter  how loudly the ambitious people may whoop about it.  Omaha wanted  to grow, regardless of the farms, and so grew beyond the true  measure of its usefulness and power; then when it got back its  consciousness it had to sit down in wretched idleness, while  waiting for the undeveloped farms to catch up.  

But the boasted growth was not all *bona fide*.  The census  of 1890 showed a population of 140,000, while the census of 1900  shows but 103,000.  The plain truth is that the returns of 1890  were "padded," probably for political ends.  Padding was the key to  the mood of the time.  In 1890 Omaha really had 85,000 or 90,000  people.  When the announcement for 1900 was made, the citizens were  a little dismayed for a day or two; but now they are quite  complacently congratulating themselves that every one knew the  earlier figures to be a lie!  

In fact, within the latter half of the past decade Omaha has  had a substantial growth in population, in industrial activity, and  in wealth.  Here are the figures, got from authoritative sources: — 

    -                             1890.              1901.

  - —

  - Output of factories . . . $68,000,000 . . . $121,000,000 . . .  Inc. 78%

  -  Jobbing trade . . . . . .  47,000,000 . . .   93,000,000 . . . Inc. 98%

  -  Bank deposits . . . . . .  14,782,200 . . .   25,764,245 . . . Inc. 78%

    -  City directory  . . . . . . .  45,260 . . . . . . 55,000 . . . Inc. 22%

  -  School enrollment . . . . . .  13,279 . . . . . . 19,384 . . . Inc. 48%

  - —

     These figures give an accurate index to what has been achieved in  Omaha; but their greatest value is in indicating (what is far more  important) the growth of the prairies that make Omaha.  

The saddest and most disastrous of all the effects of the boom  was in inciting a majority of the middle Western cities of  metropolitan pretensions to inaugurate a system of municipal  government that was much too large for the work necessary to be  done.  In this respect Omaha suffered more than most of her sister  cities.  As a matter of good common sense, Omaha needed no  elaborate scheme of government.  It was nothing but an overgrown  country town; its people were pastoral, and really wanted nothing  better than to have their town's affairs administered according to  the dictates of pastoral prudence and thrift.  But one city set the  example of overdoing, and the rest jealously followed; and now the  people have on their hands a political "machine" as burdensome as  a large family of white elephants.  There is not enough to give the  machine legitimate occupation; so it has turned its attention to  the illegitimate, and the people are suffering from "ring  politics," bossism, and all the evils of that breed, on down to  official corruption.  It began with the boom, but no one knows  where it will end.

    - "Had doting Priam checked his son's desire,
  - Troy had been bright with fame, and not with  	fire."
    Surely no good citizen should decry a wise devotion to the  problems of good government; but here is a tendency to     be  passionately enamored of professional politics in its poorest form.   La Bruyere said that "there is what is called the highway to posts  and honors, and there is a cross-and by-way, which is much the  shortest."  That "cross-and by-way" has been the favored route out  here.  The functions of public officers have been debased from  lawgiving, in its true sense, to mere lawmaking; machine-made,  "hand-me-down" laws are usurping the place of plain, honest rules  of action, and the government of the city has been carried to the  point of making it a trade, for the profit of the tradesmen in  power.  Reckless extravagance marked the beginning.  With no need  for such action, the boundaries of the city were widened to include  more than twenty-five square miles, and over this area there was  spread a close network of "improvements," — grading, paving,  sewerage, and so forth; and that course was not stopped until the  people either would not or could not vote any more bonds.  They  were already saddled with a bonded indebtedness of $5,000,000.  The  city presents an anomalous appearance to-day: there are entire  quarter sections of farm lands lying within the corporate limits,  still planted to crops, while subject to regular and "special"  municipal taxation.  Many owners of such property have been ruined  in consequence of this condition; for because of the burden of  taxes these lands have a lower market value than those lying  outside the city.  

The tax levy for the year 1901 closely approximates the sum of  $1,250,000 (or say $12 *per capita*), which will be expended for  interest on bonded debt, and for current administrative expenses of  this overgrown government.  There is no municipal ownership of any  public utilities; water, gas, electric lighting, and so forth, the  city buys from franchised companies or corporations, which in turn  have got their franchises from the machine.  In 1899 there was paid  for public water rates $90,000, and for street-lighting $80,000.   The era of franchised corporations brought a new order of political  evils, and the people have not yet devised means for dealing with  them.  Recourse to the ballot has accomplished no definite reform.   The citizens of Omaha have sometimes displayed an almost morbid  interest in voting, but within the past ten years they have not  often succeeded in voting aright.  They have lacked clear  understanding of the situation, and have also lacked able  leadership in organizing to combat it.  Almost every Western city  of any considerable size has this difficult problem to solve.  It  is the price that must be paid for having tried to do too much  within a little time.    

Omaha sprawls.  Horizontally it is a great city.  Even the  chance visitor is impressed at once by the want of cohesion and  solidity.  It is like the unjointed skeleton of a man, scattered  over a ten-acre lot: the bones are here, and they are bones of a  man's size, but they want articulation.  The front of the town  extends for seven miles along the river, presenting a most ungainly  aspect, broken and dilapidated, so that it seems to be grinning  widely at the world with a mouth whose front teeth are missing.   The city began upon the river bank; but after a little while, when  it had got its false notions of bigness, it longed to set its mark  upon the hilltops, five miles away, and then its first work was  abandoned and suffered to crumble.  That district is now largely  dedicated to vice; for Omaha feels that if it is to be indeed a  city, it must indulge all those forms of viciousness which  contribute to the appearance of cosmopolitanism.  I have talked  with officers of the city government who seemed to congratulate  themselves in saying that they had assumed a "liberal" attitude  toward all manner of social evils.  

From its base line upon the Missouri the town has cast itself  down upon its     belly, stretching out its arms to the utmost  over miles of territory, crying greedily, "It's mine, — all mine!"   But in no true sense has the city possessed its miles.  In  appearance Omaha is to-day no more than a big aggregation of little  towns.  Citified dignity and village simplicity rub elbows on every  street.  Here, on one corner, is a mammoth modern structure of  stone and steel that cost $1,000,000; and within the adjoining  block is a row of tottering frame hovels abandoned to the rats.  It  is in the residence districts that this contrast is most striking.   Go out upon almost any of the main streets, and you will presently  come to an unbroken half mile of stately avenue, grown with  beautiful trees, and lined with a double row of as pretentious  homes as you can find anywhere.  Before you can fairly catch your  breath you have passed from that scene into one of utter  desolation.  The asphalt pavement has given place to deep-rutted  yellow earth; your feet are treading a rotted wooden sidewalk or a  beaten dirt path, arched over and all but obstructed by a tangle of  sunflowers and wild hemp.  You will think you have come to the  suburbs.  But Omaha has no suburbs save in the heart of the city:  "improvement" has merely dropped a stitch.  After walking for a  quarter of a mile through that wilderness of weeds you will come to  another stretch of proud avenue, with parks and fountains and  massive mansions.  Between those districts there will likely be  cultivated cornfields and cabbage patches.  New York could be set  down upon the ground included within Omaha's boundaries, and would  hardly lap over the edges.  

The outward aspect of Omaha affords a clue to its intellectual  and moral attitude.  Its life is still rude, almost unformed.  The  people are very sensitive upon this point.  It is all one's life is  worth to say that the town lacks culture.  Culture!  What a word  that is!  Omaha has true-hearted and refined men and women in  plenty; but, rather strangely, these have not succeeded in uniting  to form a true-hearted and refined society.  I think the people are  a little chary of expressing their gentleness and refinement in  public, for fear of being considered unsophisticated or rural.   That would be hard to bear; for the town has only very lately  passed out of its rural days.  Whatever the cause, the open social  life of the place is concerned with appearances, not with verities;  it is made up mostly of postures and show; it is continually  calling attention to itself in a loud voice, after the manner of  those who are rudely affected, the world over.  There is no new  thing that lifts above the horizon of "culture" which the people of  Omaha do not forthwith import, if it promises to be fashionable.   With all its intense longing to appear cultured, the town succeeds  only in being up to date.  In fact, Omaha has no strong collective  social aims; it has no strong aggregate tendencies.  Its life thus  far has been nothing but a conglomerate of individual desires, and  there has been no adequate means for bringing these desires to a  focus.  The city has no public art galleries, no museums, — nothing  of that sort; even in architecture no particular ideals have come  to light.  This condition is a part of the penalty which the town  has had to pay for the lack of ideals in its foundation.  It was  begun for no better reason than that its founders saw here  opportunities for getting rich, and that paucity of thought has  persisted.    

Colton argued that "men, by associating in masses, as in camps  and in cities, improve their talents, but impair their virtues."   That saying is reduced to its least significance when it is applied  to a farm town.  An agricultural state, pure and simple, gives to  its cities economic stability; in a still greater degree do they  get moral stamina.  Nebraska is preeminently the farming state of  the Union, and statistics show that she leads     also in the  social virtues.  Illiteracy is at its lowest, and most of the crime  relates back to poor, simple Eve and the apple.  On the farm social  relations are fundamental, and life is correspondingly tranquil.   This does not imply moral inertia, but a primary estate of sound,  rational behavior.  A city that is in close relations with such  surroundings must be influenced thereby.  Omaha has been greatly  influenced.  The best thing to be said of the place is that beneath  the false, frothy surface there is a deep and strong current of  moral integrity.  That this has not made bold show of itself is due  to lack of inciting occasion.  The people have known no great  common vicissitudes that should draw them together and test the  fibre of the common temper.  Should such a trial come, it would be  met with an amazing strength and power of sacrifice for good ends.   The life of the prairies has made good men, but has given them no  especial motive beyond individual eagerness to get on, no  particular ideal save to possess their strength in peace.  

"A nation's character is the sum of its splendid deeds," said  Clay; and Emerson, in writing of Boston, declared that "a  community, like a man, is entitled to be judged by its best."  The  best of Omaha is very good indeed.  If one is inclined to be hasty  or harsh in judgment, it is well to remember the rule of the humane  judge, who will temper the severity of his sentence in  consideration of youth.  Bear in mind that the whole history of  Omaha is included in the span of forty-eight years; then say  whether it has done well.  No one who has taken the trouble to get  into close touch with the people of this magnificent young West can  entertain a moment's doubt for the future.  The future is in safe  hands.  When the people get to know what it is that they have to  do, they will arise and do it; and woe betide him who stands in the  way of their honest desires.  He must be hardy indeed who would  undertake to compass them about with the usages of dishonor.  Omaha  will find the way, and will keep to it.  

It would be a mistake to argue that the actual or potential  greatness of the city is brought within too narrow limits by the  lack of variety in the resources and activities of the region upon  which it must draw for the raw materials of its greatness.  The  domain that is directly tributary to Omaha comprises a large part  of the future food gardens of the world.  It is idle to try to  summarize these resources, for they are boundless, and they make  the most infallible of all sources of wealth and power.  The  present state of development has hardly served to make a scratch  upon the outmost cuticle of affairs.  Not the city alone, but the  whole of the Missouri country as well, is still in a mewling  industrial infancy: not in the least particular has maturity been  attained; not in the least degree do the people appreciate what  this land may be.  It is safe to say that all the real difficulties  of past and present are like the common little ailments of  childhood.  Society is plastic and protean, and behavior in all  ways is often whimsical, and rarely built upon sound and safe rules  dictated by practical experience.  There is plenty of law, but no  fixed policy; there is plenty of industry, but no recognized scheme  for a concerted industrial development.  All that remains to be  evolved, — and it will come.  

That the people are now inclined to a wise course may be seen  in almost every detail of the new life, as it expresses itself in  the affairs of every day.  The desire for size is giving place to  a sincerer desire for strength.  In the past, Omaha, like many  another neighboring town and city, has been content to get its  living by playing the easy part of merchantman; merely trafficking  in commodities and catering to the simple daily needs of the  people.  Not until within the past ten years has it consistently     tried to add to the value of what it handled, in the way of  manufacture; and thus it has missed its greatest opportunities.   What may be done by manufactories in Omaha and other cities of the  Missouri Valley is incalculable.  Heretofore the immense wheat  crops of Nebraska, have been sold outside the state, to be bought  back as flour.  With millions of sheep upon the outlying ranges,  there is not a yard of woolen cloth manufactured in the state.   With millions of hides and pelts annually offered for sale, there  is hardly a shoe or a glove made at home.  These examples are  illustrative of a general condition.  This lack is now being felt.   Within a few years the Commercial Club has been organized, and  this, under able management, is doing its utmost to correct a  faulty condition.  The establishment of manufactories will serve a  double purpose: it will give greater stability to the town's life  by the employment of its citizens, and it will also create home  markets for the raw materials that are now sent far away.   Notwithstanding its situation in the very heart of the wheat and  corn lands, Omaha is not a grain market: the state's great crops of  grain sift through Omaha's fingers, going to enrich other towns.   This is likely to be remedied before the new century gets into its  teens; and the change will link the farm and the city into a firmer  union, and give to both a clearer understanding that their  interests are inseparable.  

The real virtue of the community has found fit expression its  public schools.  To be sure, the conduct of school affairs has been  marked by that extravagance of expenditure which has characterized  other administrative functions; but in the schools themselves, and  in what they stand for, is the crowning glory of the young city's  life.  

The most gifted of seers must stop abashed before the attempt  to reveal the whole fortunes of this lusty youngling of the  prairies.  Greatness awaits it, if it will merit greatness.  This  will not come in obedience to the fiat of written law; neither by  "enterprise" alone, of whatsoever degree of acuteness or audacity.   It will come along broader and opener ways, attendant upon those  men of whom it is said: "They have adjusted their souls to all  senses, and all biases; have propt and supported them with all  foreign helps proper for them, and enrich'd and adorn'd them with  all they could borrow for their advantage, both within and without  the world: those are they that are plac'd in the utmost and supreme  height, to which human nature can attain.  They have regulated the  world with politics and laws.  They have instructed it with arts  and sciences, and do yet instruct it by the example of their  admirable manners."  Mark it well: that will be the true character  of the future men of the West.  Moral greatness must go before any  other real greatness that ever was or ever will be.  Fifty years  hence Omaha will be a strong city. 

   *William R. Lighton.*         