---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Locke on Money
source: 
---

            	 Short Observations on a Printed Paper  For encouraging  the coining Silver Money in England, and after for keeping it  here.  BY   John Locke                    THE author says,* "Silver yielding the proposed 2d. or 3d.  more by the ounce, than it will do by being coined into money,  there will be none coined into money; and matter of fact shows  there is none."*  

It would be hard to know what he means, when he says,* "silver  yields 2d. or 3d. more by the ounce, than it will do by being  coined into money:"* but that he tells us in plain words at the  bottom of the leaf, "that *an ounce of silver uncoined is of 2d.  more value than after it is coined it will be;"* which, I take the  liberty to say, is so far from being true, that I affirm it is  impossible to be so. For which I shall only give this short  reason, viz. because the stamp neither does nor can take away any  of the intrinsic value of the silver; and therefore an ounce of  coined standard silver must necessarily be of equal value to an  ounce of uncoined standard silver. For example, suppose a  goldsmith has a round plate of standard silver, just of the  shape, size, and weight of a coined crown-piece, which, for  brevity's sake, we will suppose to be an ounce; this ounce of  standard silver is certainly of equal value to any other ounce of  unwrought standard silver in his shop; away he goes with his  round piece of silver to the Tower, and has tee the stamp set  upon it; when he brings this numerical piece back again to his  shop coined, can any one imagine that it is now 2*d.* less worth  than it as when he carried it out smooth, a quarter of an hour  before; or, that it is not still of equal value to any other  ounce of unwrought standard silver in his shop? He that can say  it is 2*d.* less worth than it was before it had the king's image  and inscription on it, may as well say, that sixty grains of  silver, brought from the Tower, are worth but fifty-eight grains  of silver in *Lombard-street.*  

But the author very warily limits this ill effect of coinage  only to England; why it is in England, and not every where, would  deserve a reason.  

But let us grant it to be true, as our author affirms, that  coined silver in *England* is one-thirtieth worse, or of less  value, than uncoined; the natural consequence from this, if it be  true, is, that it is very unfit that the mint should be employed  in *England,* where it debases the silver one-thirtieth; for, if  the stamp lessens the value of our silver this year, it will also  do so the next, and so on to the end of the world, it always  working the same way. Nor will the altering the denomination, as  is proposed, at all help it.  

But yet he thinks he has some proof for his proposition,  because it is *matter of fact* that there is *no money coined at the  mint.* This is the great grievance, and is one indeed, but for a  different reason from what seems to inspire that paper.  

The matter in short is this; *England* sending more consumable  commodities to *Spain* than it receives from thence, the merchants,  who manage their trade, bring back the *overplus* in bullion,  which, at their return, they sell as a commodity. The chapmen,  that give highest for this, are, as in all cases of buying and  selling, those who can make most profit by it; and those are the  returners of our money, by exchange, into those countries where  our debts, any way contracted, make a need of it: for they  getting 6, 8, 10,* &c. per cent* according to the want and demand  of money from *England* there, an according to the risk of the sea,  buy up this bullion, as soon as it comes in, to send it to their  correspondents in those parts, to make good their credit for the  bills they have drawn on them, and so can give more for it than  the mint-rate, i.e. more than equal weight of milled money for an  equal weight of standard bullion; they being able to make more  profit of it by returns.  

Suppose the balance of our trade with *Holland* were in all  other commodities equal, but that in the last *East India* sale we  bought of them of *East India* commodities to the value of a  million, to be paid in a month; within a month a million must be  returned into *Holland* this presently raises the exchange, and  the traders in exchange sell their bills at high rates; but the  balance of trade being (as is supposed in the case) equal in all  other commodities, this million can no way be repaid to their  correspondents, on whom those bills were drawn, but by sending  them money or bullion to reimburse them.  

This is the true reason why the bullion brought from *Spain* is  not carried to the mint to be coined, but bought by traders in  foreign exchange, and exported by them, to supply the *overplus* of  our expenses there, which are not paid for by our commodities.  Nor will the proposed *raising* of our money, as it is called,  whether we coin our money for the future one-thirtieth, or  one-twentieth, or one-half lighter than now it is, bring one  ounce more to the mint than now, whilst our affairs in this  respect remain in the same posture. And I challenge the author to  show that it will; for saying is but saying. Bullion can never  come to the mint to be coined, whilst the over-balance of trade  and foreign expenses are so great, that to satisfy them, not only  the bullion your trade in some parts now yearly brings in, but  also some of your formerly coined money is requisite, and must be  sent out: but when a change in that brings in and lodges bullion  here, (for now it seems it only passes through *England*) the  increase of silver and gold staying in *England* will again bring  it to the mint to be coined.  

This makes it easily intelligible how comes it to pass that,  when now at the mint they can give but 5s. 2d. per ounce for  silver, they can give 5s. 4d. the ounce *in Lombard-street,* (which  is what our author means when he says, *"silver is now worth but  5s. 2d. the ounce at the mint, and is worth 5*s. 4d.* elsewhere.")*  The reason whereof is plain, viz, Because the mint, giving  weighty money for bullion, can give so much and no more for  silver than it is coined at, which is 5s. 2d. the ounce, the  public paying all the odds that is between coined and uncoined  silver, which is the manufacture of coinage: but the banker, or  returner of money, having use for silver beyond sea, where he can  make his profit of it, by answering bills of exchange, which he  sells dear, must either send our money in *specie,* or melt down  our coin to transport, or else with it buy bullion.  

The sending or money in *specie,* or melting it down, has some  hazard, and therefore, if he could have bullion for 5s, 2d. *per*  ounce, or a little dearer, it is like he would always rather  choose to exchange corn for bullion, with some little loss,  rather than run the risk of melting it down for exportation.  

But this would scarce make him pay 2d. in the crown, which is  almost three and a half *per cent*., if there were not something  more in it than barely the risk of melting, or exportation; and  that is the lightness of the greatest part of our current coin.  For example, N. has given bills for thirty thousand pounds  sterling in *Flanders,* and so has need of ten thousand weight of  silver to be transported thither; he has thirty thousand pounds  *sterling* by him in ready money, whereof five thousand pounds is  weighty milled money; what shall hinder him then from throwing  that into his melting-pot, and so reducing it to bullion to be  transported? But what shall he do for the other twenty-five  thousand pounds, which, though he has by him, is yet clipped and  light money, that is at least twenty *per cent*. lighter than the  standard? If he transports or melts down this, there is so much  clear loss to him; it is therefore more advantage to him to buy  bullion at 5s. 4d. the ounce with that light money, than to  transport or melt it down; wherein, though the seller of the  bullion has less weight in silver than he parts with, yet he  finds his account, as much as if he received it in weighty coin,  whilst a clipped crown-piece, or shilling, passes as well in  payment for any commodity here in *England* as a milled one. Thus  our mint is kept from coining.  

But this paper, *For encouraging the coining,* &c. would fain  have the mill at work, though there be no grist to be had, unless  you grind over again what is ground already, and pay toll for it  a second time: a proposition fit only for the miller himself to  make; for the meanest housewife in the country would laugh at it,  as soon as proposed. However, the author pleases himself, and  thinks he has a good argument to make it pass, viz, because the  toll to be paid for it will not amount to three hundred and  thirty thousand pounds, as is said in a late treatise about  raising the value of money, p. 170; for, he says, that writer is  mistaken in saying that *"3s. and 6d. is allowed at the mint for  the coinage of every pound troy,* "whereas *there is but sixteen  pence halfpenny there allowed for the same;* which sixteen pence  halfpenny being above one-third of 3s. 6d. it follows by his own  computation, that the new coining our money will cost the nation  above one hundred and ten thousand pounds; a small sum, in this  our plenty of riches, to be laid out for the purchasing these  following inconveniencies, without any the least advantage.  

1. A loss to the king of one-thirtieth (if you coin your  money 2d. *per crown,* one-twentieth, if you coin your money 3d.  per crown lighter) of all his standing revenue.  

2. A like loss of one-twentieth, or one-thirtieth, in all  rents that are settled; for these have, during the term, the  nature of rent-sec: but five *per cent* loss in a man's income he  thinks so little, *it will not be perceived.*  

3. *Trouble to merchants in their trade.* These inconveniencies  he is forced to allow. He might have said disorder to all people  in their trade, though he says it will be but a *little trouble to  merchants,* and without any *real damage to trade.* The author would  have done well to have made out this, and a great many other  assertions in that paper; but saying is much easier, if that may  pass for proof.  

Indeed he has, by a short way, answered the book  above-mentioned, in the conclusion of his paper, in these words:  *"And he that so grossly mistakes in so material points of what he  would assert, it is plain is not free from mistakes."* It does not  appear that he who published that book ever thought himself free  from mistakes; but he that mistakes in two material points ay be  in the right in two others, and those will still need an answer.  But one of these material points will, I think, by what is  already said, appear not to be a mistake; and for any thing the  author of the paper hath said, or can say, it will always be  true, that an ounce of silver coined, or not coined is, and  eternally will be, of equal value to any other ounce of silver.  As to any other mistake concerning the rate of coinage, it is  like he had his information from some disinterested person, whom  he thought worthy of credit. And whether it be 3s. 6d., as he was  told, or only sixteen-pence halfpenny per pound troy, as the  paper says, whether the reader will believe the one or the other,  or think it worth his more exact inquiry, this is certain, the  kingdom ought not to be at that, or any other charge, where there  is no advantage, as there will be none in this proposed coinage,  but quite the contrary.  

In his answer to  

Object. 1. He says from Edw. III. *"Silver has from time to  time (as it grew in esteem) been by degrees raised in all mints.*  "If an ounce of silver now not exchanging or paying for what  one-tenth of an ounce would have purchased in Edward the Third's  time, and so being ten times less worth now than it was then, be  growing in esteem, this author is in the right; else silver has  not, since Edward the Third's reign, *from time to time grown in  esteem.* Be that as it will, he assigns a wrong cause *of raising  of silver,* as he calls it, in our mint. For if *growing thus in  request,* i.e. by lessening its value, has been the reason of  altering our money, this change of coin, or raising the  denomination of silver in ours, and other mints, ought to have  been greater by much, since *Henry* the Seventh's time, than it was  between that and *Edward* the Third's; because the great change of  the value of silver has been made by the plenty of it poured into  this part of the world from the *West Indies,* not discovered till  Henry the Seventh's reign. So that I think I may say, that the  value of silver from *Edward* III. to Henry VII. changed not  one-tenth, but from Henry VII. till now it changed above  seven-tenths; and yet, money having been raised in our mint  two-thirds since *Edward* the Third's time, the far greater part of  the raising of it was before *Henry* the Seventh's time, and a very  small part of it since; so that the cause, insinuated by our  author, it is evident, was not the cause of lessening our coin so  often, whatever it was: and it is possible there wanted not men  of projects in those days, who for private ends, by wrong  suggestions, and false reasonings, covered with mysterious terms,  led those into mistakes, who had not the time and will nicely to  examine; though a crown-piece three times as big as one of ours  now, might, for its size alone, deserve to be reformed.  

To Object. 2 he says, *"The raising the denomination of money  in *Spain* and Portugal, was making it go for more when coined than  its true value."*  

This, I say, is impossible, and desire the author to prove  it. It did in *Spain* and *Portugal,* just what it will do here and  every where; it made not the silver coined go for more than its  value, in all things to be bought, but just so much as the  denomination was raised, just so much less of commodity had the  buyer in exchange for it: as it would be here, if you should coin  sixpences into shillings; if any one went to market with this new  money, he would find that, whereas he had a bushel of wheat last  week for eight shillings of the former coin, he would have now  but half a bushel for eight of the new shillings, when the same  denomination had but half the quantity of silver. Indeed those  who were to receive money upon former contracts would be  defrauded of half their due, receiving, in their full tale of any  denomination contracted for, but half the silver they should  have; the cheat whereof they would find, when they went to market  with their new money. For this I have above proved, that one  ounce of silver is, and eternally will be, equal in value to  another ounce of silver; and all that can possibly put a  difference between them is only the different value of the  workmanship bestowed on one more than another which in coinage,  our author tells in this paper, is but sixteen-pence halfpenny  *per pound troy.* I demand therefore of our author, to show that  any sort or, as he calls it, raising of money, can raise value of  coined silver, or make it go for more than uncoined, bating the  charge of coinage; unless it be to those who, being to receive  money upon former contracts, will, by receiving the tale agreed  for, receive less than they should of silver, and so be defrauded  of what they really contracted for.  

What effect such a raising of their money had in one  particular, I will tell our author. In *Portugal* they count their  money by reys, a very small, or rather imaginary coin, just as if  we here should count all our sums by farthings. It pleased the  government, possibly being told that it would raise the value of  their money, to raise in denomination the several species, and  make them go for a greater (let us suppose double) the number of  reys than formerly. What was the consequence? It not only  confounded the property of the subject, and disturbed affairs to  no purpose; but treaties of commerce having settled the rates of  the customs at so many reys on the several commodities, the king  immediately lost in the value half his customs. The same that in  proportion will happen in the settled revenue of the crown here,  upon the proposed change.  

For though our author in these words, *"whereas all now  desired by this act is to keep silver, when coined, of the same  value it was before,"* would insinuate, that this raising the  denomination, or lessening our coin, as is proposed, will do no  such thing; yet it is demonstration, that when our coin is  lessened 3d. in 5s., the king will receive five *per cent* less in  value in his customs, excise, and all his settled revenue, and so  proportionably, as the quantity of silver in every species of our  coin, shall be made less than now it is coined in those of the  same denomination.  

But, whatever our author means by *"making money go for more  when coined than its true value, or by keeping silver, when  coined, of the same value it was before;"* this is evident, that  raising their money thus, by coining it with less silver in it  than it had before, had not the effect in Portugal and *Spain*,  which our author proposes from it here: from it has not brought  one penny more to the mint there, nor kept their money, or  silver, from exportation since, though forfeiture and death be  the penalties joined in aid to this trick of *raising* to keep it  in.  

But our author tells us in answer to Object 4. This *"will  scarce ever at all be perceived."* If of 100 guineas a man has in  his pocket, five should be picked out, so he should not perceive  it, the fraud and the loss would not be one jot the less; and  though he perceived it not when, or how it was done, yet he will  find it in his accounts, and the going so much back in his estate  at the end of the year.  

To Object 3 he says, The *"raising* your coin *(it may be) may  raise the price of bullion* here in *England*." An ounce of silver  will always be equal in value to an ounce of silver every where,  bating the workmanship. I say it is impossible to be otherwise,  and require our author to show it possible in *England*, or any  where, or else hereafter to spare his *"may be."* To avoid  fallacies, I desire to be understood, when I use the word silver  alone, to mean nothing but silver, and to lay aside the  consideration of baser metals that may be mixed with it: for I do  not say that an ounce of standard, that has almost one-twelfth of  copper in it, is of equal value with an ounce of fine silver that  has no alloy at all; but that any two ounces of equally alloyed  silver will always be of equal value; the silver being the  measure of commerce, it is the quantity of silver that is in  every piece he receives, and not the denomination of it, which  the merchant looks after, and values it by.

  But this raising of the denomination our author would have  pass, because it will be *"better for the possessors of  bullion,"* as he says, Answer 3. But who are they who now in *England* are orwhat private men are there in of that consideration, that for  their advantage all money should be new coined, and of a less  great a charge to the nation, and loss to revenue?  

  He farther adds, Answer 3, *It not thence inevitably follow,  it will raise "the price of bullion beyond sea."*  

It will as inevitably follow, as that nineteen ounces of  silver will never be equal in weight, or worth, to twenty ounces  of silver: so much as you lessen your coin, so much more you must  pay in tale, as will make the quantity of silver the merchant  expects for his commodity; under what denomination soever he  receives it.  

The clothier, thus buying his *Spanish* wool, oil, and labour,  at five *per cent* more in denomination, sells his woollen  manufacture proportionably dearer to the *English* merchant, who,  exporting it to *Spain*, where their money is not changed, sells it  at the usual market rate, and so brings home the same quantity of  bullion for it which he was wont; which, therefore, he must sell  to yoU at the same raised value your money is at: and what then  is gained by all this? The denomination is only changed to the  prejudice of the public; but as to all the great matters of your  trade, the same quantity of silver is paid for commodities as  before, and they sold in their several foreign markets for the  same quantity of silver. But whatever happens in the rate of  foreign bullion, the raising of the denomination of our money  will bring none of it to our mint to be coined; that depends on  the balance of our trade, and not on lessening our coin under the  same denomination: for whether the pieces we call crowns be  coined 16, 24, or 100 grains lighter, it will be all one as to  the value of bullion, or the bringing more or less of it into  *England* or to our mint.  

What he says in his answer to *Object.* 4, besides what we have  already taken notice of, is partly against his bill, and partly  mistake.  

1. He says, *"It may be some (as it is now) gain to those,  that will venture to melt down the milled and heavy money now  coined."* That men do venture to melt down the milled and heavy  money is evident, from the small part of milled money is now to  be found of that great quantity of it that has been coined; and a  farther evidence is this, that milled money will now yield four  or five more *per cent* than the other, which must be to melt down  and use as bullion, and not as money in ordinary payments. The  reason whereof is, the shameful and horrible debasing, (or as our  author would have it, *raising*) our unmilled money by clipping.  

For the odds betwixt milled and unmilled money being now,  modestly speaking, above twenty *per cent*, and bullion, for  reasons elsewhere given, being not to be had, refiners, and such  as have need of silver, find it the cheapest way to buy milled  money for clipped, at four, five, or more *per cent* loss.  

I ask, therefore, this gentleman, What shall become of all  our present milled and heavy money, upon the passing of this act?  To which his paper almost confesses, what I will venture to  answer for him, viz. that, as soon as such a law is passed, the  milled and heavy money will all be melted down; for it being five  *per cent* heavier i.e. more worth than what is to be coined in  the mint, nobody will carry it thither to receive five *per cent*  less for it, but sell it to such as will give four, or four and a  half *per cent* more for it, and at that rate melt it down with  advantage: for *Lombard-street* is too quick-sighted, to give sixty  ounces of silver for fifty seven ounces of silver, when bare  throwing it into the melting-pot will make it change for its  equal weight. So that by this law five *per cent* gain on all our  milled money will be given to be shared between the possessor and  the melter of our milled money, out of the honest creditor and  landlord's pocket, who had the guaranty of the law, that under  such a tale of pieces, of such a denomination as he let his land  for, he should have to such a value, i.e. such a weight in  silver. Now I ask, Whether it be not a direct and unanswerable  reason against this bill, that he confesses, that it will be *"a  gain to those, who will melt down the milled and heavy money,"*  with so much loss to the public; and not, as he says, *"with very  small loss to those, that shall be paid in the new,"* unless he  calls five *per cent very small loss;* for just so much is it to  receive but fifty-seven grains, or ounces of silver, for sixty,  which is the proportion in making your crowns 3d. lighter. This  is certain, nobody will pay away milled or weighty crowns for  debts, or commodities, when it will yield him four or five per  cent. more; so that which is now left of weighty money, being  scattered up and down the kingdom, into private hands, which  cannot tell how to melt it down, will be kept up and lost to our  trade. And, as to your clipped and light money, will you make a  new act for coinage, without taking any care for that? The making  a new standard for your money cannot do less than make all money,  which is lighter than that standard, unpassable; and thus the  milled and heavy money not coming into payment, and the light and  clipped not being lawful money, according to the new standard,  there must needs be a sudden stop of trade, and it is to be  feared, a general confusion of affairs; though our author says,  *"it will not any ways interrupt trade."*  

2. The latter part of the section, about raising the value of  land, I take the liberty to say is a mistake; which, though a  sufficient reply to an assertion without proof, yet I shall not  so far imitate this author as barely to say things: and  therefore, I shall add this reason for what I say, viz. Because  nothing can truly raise the value, i.e. the rent of land, but the  increase of your money; but because *raising the value of land* is  a phrase, which, by its uncertain sense, may deceive others, we  may reckon up these several, meanings of it.  

1. The value of land is raised, when its intrinsic worth is  increased, i.e. when it is fitted to bring forth a greater  quantity of any valuable product. And thus the value of land is  raised only by good husbandry.  

2. The value of land is raised, when, remaining of the same  fertility, it comes to yield more rent, and thus its value is  raised only by a greater plenty of money and treasure.  

3. Or it may be raised in our author's way, which is, by  raising the rent in tale of pieces, but not in the quantity of  silver received for it; which, in truth, is no raising it at all,  any more than it could be accounted the raising of a man's rent,  if he let his land this year for forty sixpences, which last year  he let for twenty shillings. Nor would it alter the case, if he  should call those forty sixpences forty shillings; for having but  half the silver of forty shillings in them, they would be but of  half the value, however their denomination were changed.  

In his answer to the fifth *objection,* there is this dangerous  insinuation, That coin, in any country where it is coined, *goes  not by weight,* i.e. has its value from the stamp and  denomination, and not the quantity of silver in it. Indeed in  contracts already made, if your species be by law coined a fifth  part lighter, under the same denomination, the creditor must take  a hundred such light shillings, or twenty such light crown-pieces  for 5l. if the law calls them so, but he loses one-fifth, in the  intrinsic value of his debt. But, in bargains to be made, and  things to be purchased, money has, and will always have, its  value from the quantity of silver in it, and not from the stamp  and denomination, as has been already proved, and will, some time  or other, be evidenced with a witness, in the clipped money. And  if it were not so, that the value of money were not according to  the quantity of silver in it, i.e. that it goes by weight, I see  no reason why clipping should be so severely punished.  

As to foreigners, he is forced to confess, that it is all one  what our money is, greater or less, who regard only the quantity  of silver they sell their goods for; how then can the lessening  our money bring more plenty of bullion into *England* or to the  mint?  

But he says, *"The owners and importers of silver will find a  good mArket at the mint,"* &c. But always a better in  *Lombard-street,* and not a grain of it will come to the mint, as  long as by an under-balance of trade, or which other foreign  expenses, we contract debts beyond sea, which require the  remitting of greater sums thither, than are imported in bullion."  *If for above forty years after silver was raised, in the  forty-third year of queen Elizabeth, from 5s. to 5s. 2d. the  ounce, uncoined silver was not worth above 4s. 10d. per ounce;"*  -- the cause was not that raising of silver in the mint, but an  over-balance of trade, which bringing in an increase of silver  yearly, for which men having no occasion abroad, brought it to  the mint to be coined, rather than let it lie dead by them in  bullion: and whenever that is the case again in *England*, it will  occasion coining again, and not till then. *"No money was in those  days exported,"* says he; no, nor bullion neither, say I; why  should, or how could it, when our exported merchandize paid for  all the commodities we brought home, with an overplus of silver  and gold, which, staying here, set the mint on work. But the  passing this bill will not hinder the exportation of one ounce  either of bullion or money, which must go, if you contract debts  beyond sea; and how its having been *once melted in England*, which  is another thing proposed in this bill, shall hinder its  exportation, is hard to conceive, when even coining has not been  able to do it, as is demonstrable, if it be examined what vast  sums of milled money have been coined in the two last reigns, and  how little of it is now left. Besides, if the exportation of  bullion should be brought under any greater difficulty than of  any other commodity, it is to be considered whether the  management of that trade, which is in skilful hands, will not  thereupon be so ordered, -- as to divert it from coming to  *England* for the future, and cause it to be sent from *Spain*  directly to those places where they know *English* debts will make  it turn to best account, to answer bills of exchange sent  thither.  

          