---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Charter of Liberties (1682)
source: 
---

          
# Charter of Liberties (1682)

    To ALL PEOPLE to whom these presents shall come WHEREAS King Charles  the second by his Letters, Patents under the Great Seal of England for  the Considerations therein mentioned hath been graciously pleased to  give and grant unto me William Penn (By the name of William Penn Esq'r  son and heir of Sr. William Penn deceased) and to my heirs and assigns  forever ALL that tract of land or province called PENNSILVANIA in  America with divers Great Powers Preheminencies Royalties  Jurisdictions and Authorities necessary for the Well being and  Government thereof NOW KNOW YE That for the Welll Being and Government  of the said Province and for the Encouragement of all the Freeman and  Planters that may be therein concerned in pursuance of the powers  afore mentond I the said William Penn have declared Granted and  Confirmed and by these presents for me my heirs and Assigns do declare  grant and Confirm unto all the flreemen Planters and Adventurers of in  and to the said Province those Liberties Franchises and properties TO  Enjoyed and Kept by the Freemen Planters and Inhabitants of  and in the said province of Pennsilvania forever. 

    " IMPRIMIS "-THAT the Government of this Province shall according to  the Powers of the Patent consist of the Governour and Freemen of the  said Province in the fform of a Provincial Council and General  Assembly by whom all Laws Shall be made Officers Chosen and publick  affairs Transacted and is hereafter Respectively declared That is to  say 

    2. THAT the freemen of the said Province shall on the Twentieth day  of the Twelfth Month which shall be in this present year One Thousand  Six hundred Eighty and two Meet and Assemble in some fit place of  which timely notice shall be beforehand given by the Governour or his  deputies and then and there shall chuse of themselvs Seventy-Two  persons of most note for their Wisdom Virtue and Ability who shall  meet on the Tenth day of the ffirst month next ensuing and always be  called and act as the Provincial Councill of the said province. 

    3. THAT at the First Choice of such Provincial Council One Third part  of the said Provincial Council shall be Chosen to serve for Three  years then next ensuing one Third part for Two years then next ensuing  and one Third part for one year then next following such Election and  no longer and that the said Third part shall go out accordingly And on  the Twentieth day of the Twelfth month aforesaid yearly forever  afterward the ffreemen of the said province shall in like manner Meet  and Assemble together and then Chuse Twenty flour persons being one  Third of the said Number to serve in provincial Council for Three  years it being intended that one Third of the whole provincial Council  always consisting and to consist of seventy two persons as aforesaid)  falling off yearly it shall be yearly supplied by such new yearly  Eleccons as aforesaid and that no one person shall continue therein  longer than Three years And in Case any member shall decease before  the Last Eleccon during his time that then at the next Eleccon ensuing  his decease another shall be chosen to Supply his place for the  remaining time he was to have served and no longer.  

    4. THAT-After the First Seven Years every one of the said Third parts  that goeth yearly off shall be uncapable of being Chosen again for one  whole year following that so all may be fitted for the Government and  have Experience of the Care and burthen of it. 

    5. THAT-In the provincial Council in all Cases and matters of moment  as There agreeing upon Bills to be passed into Laws Exorting Courts of  Justice having Judgment upon criminals Impeached and choice of  Officers in such manner as is herein after menconed Not lesse than Two  Thirds of the whole Provincial Council shall make a Quorum and that  the Consent and approbaton of Two Thirds of said Quorum shall be had  in all such Cases or matters of Moment. And moreover that in all cases  and matters of lesser moment Twenty-ffour members of the said  Provincial Council shall make a quorum The Majority of which flour and  Twenty shall and may always determine on such Cases and Causes of  Lesser moment. 

    6. THAT-In this Provincial Council the Governour or his deputies  shall or may always preside and have a treble Voice. And the said  Provincial Council shall always Continue and Sit upon its own  Adjournments and Committees. 

    7. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall prepare and  propose to the General Assembly hereinafter menconed all Bills which  they shall at any time think fit to be past into Laws within the said  Province which Bills shall be publish" and Affixed to the most noted  places in the inhabited parts thereof Thirty days before the meeting  of the General Assembly in order to the passing of them into laws or  Rejecting of them as the General Assembly shall see meet. 

    8. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall take Care that all  Laws Statutes and Ordinances which shall at any time be made within  the said Province be duly and diligently executed. 

    9. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall at all times have  the Care of the peace and Safety of the Province and that nothing he  by any person Attempted to the subversion of this Frame of Government.  

    10. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall at all times  settle and order the Situation of all Cities ports and Market towns in  every County modelling therein all publick buildings Streets and  Market places and shall appoint all necessary roads and highways in  the province. 

    11. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall at all times have  power to inspect the management of the public Treasury and punish  those who shall Convert any part thereof to any other use than what  hath been Agreed upon by the Governour Provincial Council and General  Assembly. 

    12. THAT-The Governour and Provincial Council shall Erect and order  all publick Schools and incourage and Reward the Authors of usefull  Science and Laudable Inventons in the said province. 

    13. THAT-For the better management of the powers and Trust aforesaid  the Provincial Council shall from time to time divide itself into  flour Distinct and proper Committees for the more Easie Administration  of the Affairs of the province which divides the Seventy Two into  flour Eighteens Every one of which Eighteens shall consist of Six out  of each of the Three Orders or yearly Eleccons-Each of which shall  have a distinct portion of business as followeth A Committee of  plantatons to situate and settle cities ports and Market-towns and  highways and to hear and decide all Suits and Controversies relating  to Plantatons. A Committee of Justice and Safety to secure the peace  of the province and punish the Male [mat-] Administration of those who  subvert Justice to the prejudice of the publick and private Interest.  Committee of Trade and Treasury who Shall Regulate all Trade and  Commerce according to Laws encourage Manufacture and Country-growth  and defray the publick Charge of the province. And a Committee of  manners Education and Arts that all Wicked and scandalous Living may  be prevented and that Youth may be successively trained up in Virtue  and useful Knowlledge and Arts. The Quorum of each of which Committees  being six that is Two out of each of the three orders or yearly  eleccons as aforesaid make a Constant or Standing Council of Four and  Twenty which shall have the power of the Provincial Council being the  Quorum of it in all Cases not excepted in the ffifth Article. And in  the said committees and standing Council of the Province the Governour  or his deputy shall or may preside as aforesaid. And in the Absence of  the Governour or his deputy if no one is by either of them appointed  the said Committees or Council shall appoint a President for that time  and not otherwise and what shall be Resolved at such Committees shall  be reported to the said Council of the Province and shall be by them  resolved and confirmed before the same shall be put in Execution And  that these Respective Committees shall not sit at one and the same  time except in Cases of necessity.  

    14. AND TO THE End that all Laws prepared by the Governour and  Provincial Council aforesaid may yet have the more-full Concurrence of  the Freemen of the Province It is declared granted and confirmed that  at the time and place or places for the Choice of a Provincial Council  as aforesaid the said FREEMEN shall yearly chuse to serve in a General  Assembly as their representatives not exceeding Two hundred persons  who shall yearly meet on the Twentieth day of the Second Month in the  Capital Town or City of the said province where during Eight days the  several members mav freely confer with one another and if any of them  see meet with a Committee of the Provincial Council consisting of  Three out of each of the flour Committees aforesaid being Twelve in  all which shall be at that time purposely appointed to secuir from any  of them proposals for the Alteration or Amendment of any of the said  proposed and promulgated Bills and on the ninth day from their meeting  the said General Assembly after the reading over of the proposed Bills  by the Clerk of the Provincial Council and the occasion and motives  for them being opened by the Governour or his Deputy shall give their  Affirmative or Negative which,to them seemeth best in such manner as  hereafter is express. But not less than two thirds shall make a Quorum  in the passing of Laws and Choice of such Officers as are by them to  be chosen. 

    15. THAT-The Laws so prepared and proposed as aforesaid that are  Assented to by the General Assembly shall be Enrolled as Laws of the  province with this stile by the Governour with the Assent and  Approbation of the ffreemen in Provincial Council and General  Assembly.  

    16. THAT-For the better Establishment of the Government and Laws of  this province and to the end there may be an Universal Satisfaction in  the laying of the ffundamentals thereof the General Assembly shall or  may for the ffirst year consist of all the ffreemen of and in the said  province and ever after it shall be yearly chosen as aforesaid. Which  number of Two hundred shall be enlarged as the Country shall Increase  in people So as it do not exceed dive hundred at any time The  Appointment and proportoning of which as also the laying and  methodizing of the choice of the Provincial Council and General  Assembly in future times most equally to the Division of the Hundreds  and Counties which the Country shall hereafter be divided into shall  be in the power of the Provincial Council to propose and the General  Assembly to resolve. 

    17. THAT The Governour and the Provincial Council shall from time to  time erect Standing Courts of Justice in such places and number as  they shall Judge Convenient for the good Government of the said  province And that the Provincial Council shall on the Thirteenth day  of the First month yearly Elect and present to the Governour or his  Deputy a double number of persons to serve for Judges Treasurers  Masters of the Rolls within the said province for the year next  ensuing. AND the ffreemen of the said province in their County Courts  when they shall be erected and till then in the General Assembly shall  on the Three and Twentieth day of the Second Month yearly Elect and  present to the Governour or his Deputy a double number of persons to  serve for Sheriffs Justices of peace and Coronors for the year next  ensuing Out of which respective Eleccons and presentments the  Governour or his Deputy shall nominate and Commissionate the proper  number for each office the Third day after the said respective  presentments or else the first named in such presentment for each  office shall stand and serve for that office the year ensuing. 

    18. BUT for as much as the present Conditon of the Province requires  some Immediate Setlement and admitts not of so quick a Revoluton of  Officers and to the end the said Province may with all Convenient  speed be well ordered and settled I William Penn do therefore think  fit to nominate and appoint Such persons for Judges Treasurers Masters  of Rolls Sheriffs Justices of the peace and Coronors as are most fitly  qualified for those imployments To whom I shall make and grant  Commissions for the said Offices respectively TO nod to them to whom  the same shall be granted for so long time as every such person shall  well behave himself in the Office or place to him respectively granted  and no longer And upon the Decease or displacing of any of the said  Officers the Succeeding Officer or Officers shall be chosen as before  said. 

    19. That the General Assembly shall continue so long as may be  needful to Impeach Criminals fit to be there Impeached To pass Bills  into Laws that they shall think fit to pass into Laws and till such  time as the Governour and Provincial Council shall declare that they  have nothing further to propose unto them for their Assent and  Approbation And that Declaration shall be a Dismiss to the General  Assembly for that time Which General Assembly shall be notwithstanding  Capable of Assemblying together upon the summons of the Provincial  Council at any time during that year if the said Provincial Council  shall see occasion for their so Assembling. 

    20. THAT-All the Eleccons of Members or Representatives of the people  to serve in Provincial Council and General Assembly, and all Questions  to be determined by both or either of them that relate to passing of  bills into Laws to the choice of Officers to Impeachments made by the  General Assembly and Judgment of Criminals upon such Impeachment by  the Provincial Council and to all other Cases by them respectively  Judged of Importance Shall be resolved and determined by the BALLOTT  And unless on suddain and Indispensable Occasions no business in  Provincial Council or its respective Committees shall be finally  determined the same day that it is moved.  

    21. AND THAT at all times when and so often as it shall happen that  the Governour shall or may be an Infant under the Age of one and  Twenty years and no Guardians or Commissioners are appointed in  Writing by the dasher of said Infant or that Such Guardians or  Commissioners shall be deceased that during such Minority the  Provincial Council shall from time to time as they shall see meet  Constitute and Appoint Guardians and Commissions not exceeding Three  One of which Three shall preside as Deputy and Chief Guardian during  such Minority and shall have and Execute with the consent of the other  Two all the powers of a Governour in all publick Affairs and Concerns  of the said province. 

    22. THAT-as often as any day of the month mentoned in any Article of  this Charter shall fall on the First day of the Week commonly called  the Lord's day the Business appointed for that day shall be differred  till the next day unless in Case of Emergency. 

    23. THAT-no act Law or Ordinance whatsoever shall at any time  hereafter be made or done by the Governour of this Province his heirs  or Assigns or by the ffreemen in the Provincial Council or the General  Assembly to Alter Change or Diminish the dorm or Effect of this  Charter or any part or Clause thereof or contrary to the true Intent  and meaning thereof without the Consent of the Governour his heirs or  Assigns and six parts of seven of the said ffreemen in Provincial  Councll and General Assembly. 

    24. AND LASTLY THAT I the said William Penn for myself my heirs and  Assigns have Solemnly declared granted and confirmed and do hereby  solemnly declare grant and confirm that neither I my heirs nor Assigns  shall procure or do anything or things w hereby the liberties in this  Charter contained and expressed shall be Infringed or broken And if  anything be procured by any person or persons contrary to these  premises it shall be held of no force or Effect. IN WITNESS whereof I  the said William Penn have unto this present Charter of Liberties Set  my hand and Broad Seal this ffive and Twentieth day of the Second  Month vulgarly called April in the year of our Lord One Thousand Six  Hundred Eighty and Two. 

     WM, PENN. 
 	Signed sealed and delivered by the within named 
 	William Penn as his Act and Deed in the presence of 
   CHRISTOPHER TAYLOR
  CHARLES LLOYD
  WILLIAM GIBSON
  RICHARD DAVIES
  N. MOORE
  THO. RUDYARD
  HARB. SPRINGETT
  JAMES CLAYPOOLE
  FRANS PLUMSTED
  THOMAS BARKER
  PHILIP FORD
  EDWARD PRTICHARD
  ANDREW SOWLE        