---
layout: narrative

title: >
    The Art of War and Newpaper Men
source: 
---

        
# Remington, Frederic.  "The Art of War and Newspaper Men."   *Harper's Weekly* 34, 6 Dec. 1890: 947. 

   LESS than two weeks ago I passed over the trail from  Rushville, Nebraska, to the Pine Ridge Agency behind Major-General  Nelson A. Miles.  To-night the moon is shining as it did then, but  it will go down in the middle of the night, and I can see in my  mind's eye the Second Infantry and the Ninth Troopers, with their  trains of wagons, plodding along in the dark.  The distance is  twenty-eight miles, and at four o'clock in the morning they will  arrive.  When the Ogallalas view the pine-clad bluffs they will see  in the immediate foreground a large number of Sibley tents, and,  being warriors, they will know that each Sibley has eighteen men in  it.  They will be much surprised.  They will hold little impromptu  councils, and will probably seek for the motive of this  concentration of troops.  And some man will say: "Well, the  soldiers are here, and if your people don't keep quiet—  Well, you  know what soldiers are for."  The Ogallalas will understand why the  soldiers are there without any further explanation.  There may be  and probably will be some white friend of the Indians who can tell  them something they do not know.  A little thing has happened since  the Ogallalas laid their arms down, and that is that the bluecoats  in the Second Infantry can put a bullet into the anatomy of an  Ogallala at one thousand yards' range with almost absolute  certainty if the light is fair and the wind not too strong.  

I must not try to prophesy what the Ogallalas will do when  they see the Sibleys, but I hope the friend will be there to tell  them what a regular soldier and a Long Tom can do.  The days when  they could circle like hawks about a rabbit are gone.  The modern  United States soldier can pile a pony up in a heap before its rider  can go one hundred yards.  I realize that before this matter is  printed the biggest Indian war since 1758 will be in progress, or  that the display of military force will have accomplished its  object, and the trouble gone.  

The thing that is most remarkable about this concentration of  troops is that the white people of the country read it in the  evening papers, and with the first rays of to-morrow's sun the  Ogallalas, the Cheyennes, and the Sitting Bull people will see it  with their own eyes.  Why did not the white people know it before?   It must have occupied the military authorities for some days.  The  reason is this: not until late years could the Indians read  English, but now the school-boys and squaw men can, and I have  picked up copies of the New York and Chicago papers on the counters  of an Indian trader's store, where a room was full of Indians,  three or four of whom could probably read as well as most men.  The  cause of the secrecy is at once apparent.  If an Omaha paper had  printed a despatch saying that General Miles was suddenly to  concentrate troops at Pine Ridge Agency in three days' time, that  paper would be on the counter in a trader's store inside of a day  and a half, and the Ogallalas, in all probability, would be  scampering over the plains on the way to meet the northern  Cheyennes and join issue with Uncle Sam's troops.  Now they awake  some fine morning and see the Sibleys, and if a turbulent  disposition is displayed, the ringleaders are arrested, and the  thing stopped.  Hundreds of settlers' lives will be saved,  thousands of dollars' worth of horses and cattle are left  untouched, and the general government escapes the expenses of a war  which would run into the millions.  Meanwhile you and I read our  papers, and find we are reading news which is fresh, only it might  have been printed three days before.  

In these days a military officer has to conduct his operations  as secretly in Indian war as he would in a civilized case, all of  which is very different from the days when expeditions were fitting  out for months, and every man knew of it.  The Interior Department,  a few old medicine men, and the most desperate of the old war  chiefs must divide the blame for the whole business.  

                                FREDERIC REMINGTON.              