---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Our Patent-System, and What We Owe to It
source: 
---

              	   SCRIBNER'S MONTHLY
  VOL. XVII.           NOVEMBER, 1878.              NO. 1.
  pp. 99-111
                                           OUR PATENT-SYSTEM, AND WHAT WE OWE TO IT.
                                           by
  James Richardson
                                                             We are a nation of inventors, and every invention is patented;  yet, curiously, there is no subject quite so void of interest to the  average gentle reader," as patents and patent-rights.  Why, it is  hard to say; for there is no factor of modern civilization that  comes home to every one more constantly or more closely.  Indeed, in  their ubiquity and unresting action, patents have been aptly likened  to the taxes which Sydney Smith described as following the overtaxed  Englishmen of his day from the cradle to the grave.  Does the  comparison hold as well, as some assert, in respect to  burdensomeness?  

It is not to be expected that an institution which enters so  potently into our life-conditions as the patent-system does, should  be, in all its workings, invariably beneficial.  Human interests are  very conflicting.  The sunshine or the rain that makes my harvest  sure may spoil yours; and, as with the forces of nature, so with  human contrivances.  They must of necessity go contrary to our  wishes sometimes.  The most we can reasonably ask of any social or  govern     mental plan is that it shall be, in the main and in the  long run, clearly beneficent.  If the good it does more than  balances the evil that attends its working, and if there is nothing  at hand that can serve us better, the part of wisdom is to make the  best of it, changing, if at all, only with a view to improvement.   From this stand-point let us examine the objections raised against  this system.  

Patents for inventions are based on the theory of intellectual  property, — that is to say, the right of men to own and control the  creations of their minds, not less than the work of their hands.  To  this it is objected that there can be no such thing as property in  ideas, — that the notion is an absurdity, and the attempt to enforce  the alleged right a restriction of common rights.  Others say that  a patent is nothing less than a monopoly, and monopolies are a relic  of barbarism, justly odious to all civilized men; that  letters-patent are no better than letters of marque, to allow the  holder to prey upon honest industry, and that not the industry of  enemies and foreigners, but of his own countrymen.  It is further  objected that patents increase the price of commodities; that by  encouraging the invention of labor-doing or labor-saving inventions,  they take from the artisan his only means of earning a living, and  by lessening the demand for skilled labor and individual  intelligence they tend to sink the man in the machine; that a patent  allows one man to step in and say that other men shall not carry on  their business in the best way; that by patenting an invention we  practically tie up the idea involved and stop the whole course of  thought in that direction, thereby interfering injuriously with  intellectual activity; that by the conventional reward which patents  offer we give an unnatural impulse to the inventive faculty, and so  destroy the natural equilibrium of men's capacities, and foster a  fanciful turn of mind at the expense of thoroughness and a patient  working out of sound ideas.  The last very comical objection has  been gravely urged by an Englishman, who, for a horrible example,  pointed to the United States, where, he said, "the factitious value  attached to invention has tended to produce an almost total  sacrifice of solid workmanship to flimsy ingenuity."  

The sole object for which patents are granted is the advancement  of the useful arts, through the making and speedy publishing of  inventions.  The patent-system seeks to secure this double end, not  by directly rewarding inventors, but by recognizing their exclusive  right to the use and profit of their new ideas for a term of years,  in return for which recognition each inventor makes public an  explicit description of his invention or discovery.  The opponents  of the system assert that it is no part of the duty of the state to  advance the arts; that inventors do not need to be encouraged in  this or any other artificial way; that patents do not encourage  inventors either to make or to publish their inventions; that  patents destroy natural competition in the arts, and thus tend to  weaken the natural impulse of men to make improvements; that patents  do not reward inventors uniformly or in proportion to their merits;  that they throw difficulties in the way of invention, and so hinder  and annoy inventors; and contrarily, that they lead to an excessive  development of the faculty of invention, and impel men to waste  their time in profitless experiments.  But the saddest of all the  objections we have met was that of an eloquent and sympathetic  Frenchman, who complained that patents give undue advantage to their  possessors, "making a golden bridge for him who enters the arena  with arms more subtle and more finely tempered than those of his  adversaries."  This reminds us of the tender-hearted boy that wept  over the Bible picture for fear that there would not be enough of  Daniel to go around.  

It is still further urged against the patent-system that,  through its action, we discriminate against native industries and  play into the hands of foreign manufacturers; for, having no  inventors' royalties or license fees to pay, they can sell so much  the cheaper, and thus command markets that otherwise might be ours;  also, that many large users of patented inventions — railway  companies, for example — find it unprofitable to do without, and very  burdensome to pay for, the inventions they need; and that, while the  infringement of patent-rights is apt to be expensive, it is a great  trouble to manufacturers and others to keep track of the operations  of the patent-office so as to know whether the devices they want to  use are patented or not.  Finally, it is claimed that patents are  inconsistent with the spirit of the age; that some of the leading  statesmen and savants of Europe have declared against the policy of  issuing patents, and that in Switzerland the utmost freedom of trade  in ideas — the unrestricted seizure of the inventions of all nations  without payment      therefor — has been a winning game for the  masters and artisans of that thrifty little state.  

In view of all this, does it not seem a little remarkable, to  say the least, that, with our extremely liberal patent-system and  two hundred thousand patents in force, we should have any industries  at all?  

Happily, many of these plausible objections are mutually  destructive, and we may be sure that the rest will appear less  formidable when tested by the logic of fact; for this reason, if for  no other: that the industrial progress of modern times has been  coincident with inventions, and inventions have coincided  geographically with patent-laws; still more, they have been locally  numerous or the reverse in proportion to the liberality of those  laws.  

Assuming — with all proper deference to the pope, the Turk, and  the socialist — that our modern civilization is in the main a good  thing; and admitting that inventions rank among the chief factors of  our civilization, at least in its material aspects, we must further  admit that they are in their grand results, if not in all their  details, good and worthy of being encouraged.  And, as a matter of  common honesty, we must also admit that, if inventors have any  property rights in the fruits of their genius and toil, such rights  ought to be respected.  Whether the patent-system provides a proper  and sufficient method for encouraging invention and protecting  inventors' rights, can be determined only by a study of the  threefold influence of patents on invention, on industrial progress,  and on public prosperity.  

Accordingly, let us inquire how patents affect inventors; how  they affect large users of patented appliances and processes, as,  for example, farmers and manufacturers; how they affect the laboring  classes; finally, how they affect social conditions generally, by  changing the scope and cost of the necessaries, conveniences, and  luxuries of life.  If space permits, a few words may be added with  regard to the advantages of a patent-system that favors every grade  of inventors, as the American system does, by its accessibility,  cheapness, and liberality.  

It may not be amiss to say here that a patent is nothing more  than an official certificate that the patentee claims to be the  inventor of some thing or process that is new and useful, and that,  with the evidence in the possession of the patent-office, there is  good reason to believe the claim to be a just one.  In no sense is  the patent a reward for invention, nor is the patent-system in any  way to blame if the inventor derives no benefit from his invention.   The patent-office merely registers and publishes the claim; the  courts must confirm its validity, in case the claim is disputed.  In  the vast majority of cases, the presumptive right of the patentee to  the absolute control of his invention for the specified term of  years, goes unchallenged.  Does the patent create that right?  So  the opponents of the patent-system assert; but the truth is quite  the contrary.  The right exists by virtue of the inventor's act of  creation.  The patent defines the nature and scope of the ideal  property, and at the same time limits the period of its exclusive  enjoyment.  It is a case of give and take, in which the chief  concession is made by the inventor.  The time will come when  patent-rights will be limited only by the natural life of  inventions, — which is shorter than most people imagine, — just as  other property rights are; but for the present the status of  intellectual property is so insecure that great concessions have to  be made by the owners of such property to popular-barbarism.  

In respect to the rights of intellectual property, public  opinion is, in fact, not much above the level of the socialistic  plane in respect to material property; and many a man, who realizes  keenly enough the iniquity of the chicken-thief or pickpocket, is  quite unconscious of any wrong in the infringement of an inventor's  or an author's rights.  Indeed, very few seem to be aware that, as  Professor Shaler has pointed  out,[^RicPate1]  "When we come to weigh the  rights of the several sorts of property which can be held by man,  and in this judgment take only the absolute questions of justice,  leaving out the limitations of expediency and prejudice, it will be  clearly seen that intellectual property is, after all, the only  absolute possession in the world.  The man who brings out of  nothingness some child of his thought, has rights therein which  cannot belong to any other sort of property."  Nor are many aware  that, as the same writer shows in another connection, when we  consider the circumstances connected with the origin of the title to  intellectual property through letters-patent, and compare it with  those other property rights which are commonly considered the more  real, the proof is convincing that the element of newness is the  most noticeable feature concerning its history, and that in its  origin it is essentially like the other property rights.    [^RicPate1]:  "Nature of Intellectual Property."

        Said Judge Storrow, before the Congressional committee on  patents last winter:  

"I look upon it as a mark of the highest civilization that a  country shall recognize by its fundamental law, the utilitarian  effects of pure brain-power; as a mark both of the highest  civilization, and of the highest reaches of the law that a nation  recognizes as property to be protected, because helpful to the state  and to all its people, the pure creations of the intellect; a  species of property not inherent in or attached to any particular  portion of matter, but which depends for its recognition on the  appreciative intellect of the community, and for its  protection — that is, for its existence as property — upon the  national deference for law and order."  

The monopoly which an inventor enjoys under a patent bears no  comparison to those monopolies of privilege by which semi-civilized  rulers reward their favorites.  The inventor's monopoly infringes no  man's rights; it diminishes in no wise the world's stock of common  possessions; it simply recognizes the patentee's exclusive right to  control something which he has discovered or created; something  which the world had not before him, and might never have had except  for him.  

To compare letters-patent to letters of marque is equally unfair  and unjust.  The idea of a patentee preying upon industry is  grotesque in its absurdity.  He cannot take to himself a single  thing or process that the world has previously enjoyed; nor can he  restrain any one from doing precisely as he has always done, if he  prefers the old way.  True the new way may make the old  unprofitable; and that is where invention always hurts.  In all  progress somebody comes out behind.  Shall we therefore worship  immobility, Chinese-fashion?  

Very often the first visible effect of an invention is the  practical destruction of interests involving much of capital, and  employing many laborers.  Of this sort was the invention of  artificial substitutes for vegetable dyes, like madder; in which  case an industry almost national in magnitude had to be given up;  yet the conversion of the madder-growing lands to food-producing  areas proved advantageous, not merely to the world at large but also  to the immediate tillers of them.  The whaling industry was all but  destroyed by the inventions which raised petroleum from  insignificance to one of our most valuable resources.  Sooner or  later the manufacture of gas for illuminating purposes will receive  its death-blow from inventions perfecting the electric light.  And  think what a crushing blow would be given to the greatest  manufacturing interest in existence, should some one succeed in  producing aluminium at the present cost of iron; or to the  coal-mining interest, should there be devised an economical method  of utilizing the enormous power of the tides, or the solar forces  now squandered upon tropical deserts!  Yet who would seriously argue  that the ultimate effects of such inventions would not be enormously  advantageous to the race?  Or who would expect the owners of  superseded establishments to submit cheerfully to the new order of  things?  

At a time like the present, when inventors are so numerous, so  active and so fertile, it is not at all surprising that there should  be many who feel that, after all our boasting about  nineteenth-century progress, we may have rather too much of it.  Nor  is it surprising that in many cases the strongest opposition to  inventors' rights should come from men who have reaped large  benefits from the patent-law.  The moment an inventor ceases to  invent and becomes a manufacturer and merchant, that moment, if he  is a self-seeker only, his opinion of the patent-system may undergo  a radical change.  The moment the owner of a profitable patent is  confronted by a man with a better invention which he cannot get  control of, he is apt to become a little dubious.  So long as the  system conserved his interests, he could look upon it as a good  thing; but he is not so sure of it when it permits another to entice  away his customers.  However, in justice to our inventors and  manufacturers, it must be said that opposition to the patent-system  very rarely comes from them.  That ungrateful work is almost  entirely monopolized by the railway companies, or rather a few of  them.  Forgetting the important circumstance that it is to inventors  that they owe their daily successes not less than their original  existence, they foolishly think that they can succeed indefinitely  without them; at any rate they adopt the course best calculated to  drive invention into other channels; and not satisfied with boldly  invading inventors' rights, they have the assurance to appeal to  Congress for an amendment of the patent-law, which shall put  inventors completely under their thumbs.  Foremost in this effort  has been the Western Railway Association, the temper of which is  fairly illustrated by the cool avowal of one of its prominent  members, that "whenever our attention is called to a patent of       value, we use it, and in a few cases we are made to pay by  plucky inventors; but in the aggregate we pay much less than if we  took licenses at first."  

In course of time the moral development of the community at  large will rise to such a level that it will not be prudent for any  man or set of men to undertake to carry out so boldly  

                    "the good old plan,  

        That they shall take who have the power,  

                And they shall keep who can!"    As yet, however, even in the most enlightened countries, the rights  of intellectual property are but feebly respected.  "The great  protection of property," says judge Storrow, "the strong arm of the  law, the power of the police and the criminal courts, the right of  every man to defend his own by force, is utterly denied to the  patentee in this country.  For one who steals the machine of the  infringer, there is the summary arrest and the prison; but for the  infringer who has wantonly stolen my invention, there is no  policeman, no prosecution at government expense, no terror of  punishment."  The wronged patentee may sue for loss or damages, but  that is a slow and often fruitless process, particularly if the  defendant has money and the plaintiff none.  

The assertion that the patent-system interferes injuriously with  intellectual progress by blocking the course of thought is curiously  at variance with the evidence of history.  As soon as a patent is  granted, the invention is made public and the new idea passes into  the mental capital of thinking men.  The better the idea, the sooner  it bears fruit.  At once a score or more of ingenious men say, "Here  is a good thing;" and straightway they set to work to develop the  idea, to apply it in new ways, or to compass the same or a similar  end in a different way.  Hence the swarms of kindred inventions that  follow every important excursion from the beaten line of thought.   Generic inventions are particularly prolific in after patents;  witness the steam-engine, the telegraph, the sewing-machine, the  telephone.  So far from blocking the course of thought in their  direction, such patents open flood-gates of useful invention.  What  miracles of previously undreamed-of invention have been called out  by the telephone within a year!  What worlds of unexplored fact and  thought have thereby been laid open for scientific investigation!  

The assertion that patents over-stimulate invention, to the  destruction of honest and solid workmanship, is simply preposterous.   When that charge was made, the Centennial Exhibition had not opened  the eyes of the world to the real condition of the industrial arts  in America; and English readers were less familiar with our "flimsy  inventions" than now, when American products have invaded every  market in Europe, to the consternation of local producers.  One of  the Swiss commissioners, a large manufacturer, wrote as follows:   "For several years the Americans have set themselves to work to  equal and outstrip Europe.    They have not failed.  The world  has never seen so considerable a sum of new ideas and of  applications of those new ideas as was presented by the exposition  at Philadelphia."  In another connection, after saying that if a  Swiss manufacturer wished to contend only against competition, he  was obliged to bring his machinery from America, he asked:  "Who  does not know American sewing-machines? and who has not already  become satisfied that even when machines of the same kind are made  in Europe in enormous quantities, the somewhat higher price of the  American machines is largely compensated for by their construction,  their solidity, and their convenience?  Have you ever compared a  rake, a knife, a hatchet, made in America with tools made here?  How  much is Europe left behind!  I do not speak of special articles of  which many are not known to us.  While our makers aim generally at  products heavy, massive, solid in appearance, and save rather in the  quality of the metal than on the weight, American workmanship is  light, pleasing to the eye, and almost always employs good  material."  A little further on, the same critical observer sums up  the characteristics of American manufactures in the five  words, — handsome, solid, practical, light, and good.  That American  inventiveness has not injured the quality of American workmanship,  is equally evident in many other departments of production.  Witness  the favor with which European and other foreign markets have  received our leather and leather goods, watches, light hardware,  carpenters' and other artisans' tools, saws, agricultural implements  and machinery, cheese, canned goods, carriages and carriage  materials, railway and tram-way cars, locomotive engines, chilled  rollers for sheet metal, rubber and paper making, wood and leather  working machinery, paper and paper-hangings, tinware, toys, hard  rubber goods, sewing and knitting machines, and a long list of less  important articles, the superior quality of      which enables them  to compete with European products, even when to their higher cost is  added a heavy percentage for transportation.  

Whether or not it is the duty of the state to encourage the  industrial arts, it is superfluous to argue; it pays to do so, and  that is enough.  Besides, if civilization is worth having, it is  worth perfecting by all legitimate means.  But, say the objectors,  inventors do not need to be encouraged, and, if they did, patents  would not be a proper means for reaching the desired end.  Inventors  do not say so; on the contrary, their testimony is uniformly in  favor of the patent-system.  Not that the system as developed in  this country or anywhere else is perfect; no one claims that; but it  is infinitely better than any substitute for it that has ever been  proposed.  Imperfect as patent-laws have been in many of their  details, they have offered to inventors a degree of protection  without which, they tell us, they would rarely have had the heart,  even had they felt the inclination, to devote to their ideas the  time and money required to put them into practical working order.   Very often the profits of one unimportant patent has put into the  hands of an inventor the money required to work out an invention  which has marked an era in the world's industrial progress.  Such  was the case of Bigelow, of the carpet loom; and with Lyall, the  inventor of the positive-motion loom.  The greatest of all our  recent inventors, Edison, furnishes another illustration.  His  patents are his capital, and they bring in the money required to  keep up the costly laboratory at Menlo Park.  Patting the  phonograph, when it was the latest offspring of his brain, he said,  "This is the boy that is to take care of his father in his old age!"  

No one can study the lives of Watt and Stephenson, Fulton, Wood,  Whitney, Nott, Colt, Howe, Blanchard, Goodyear, Morse, McCormick,  and the thousand other inventors who have given to our modern  civilization its character, without being impressed by the fact that  the protection offered by patent-laws has been, if not their  greatest incentive to invent, at least an essential condition of  their devoting their lives to this beneficent work.  And though many  inventors have been grievously wronged by unscrupulous infringers,  while the public which owed so much to them looked on with  indifference or applauded the robbery, yet it is to be doubted  whether a single inventor could be found who would have the  patent-system abolished.  The gross injustice done to inventors, as  in Whitney's case, is to be charged to corrupt courts and an  undeveloped moral sense on the part of the community, and not to any  radical defect in the patent-system.  Even material property is not  yet entirely secure against invasion among us.  

The substitution of specific rewards for invention, as proposed  by the grangers and a few others, finds favor with no one who has  fairly investigated the conditions of the case.  In the first place,  it is no part of the duty of the state to reward inventors; but it  is the duty of the state to protect the rights of all its members,  inventors not less than others.  The recognition of their rights is  a matter of justice, not an act of charity.  Again, admitting that  inventors would be willing to surrender their rights for a cash  payment, it would require something like official omniscience to  determine, in any case, the just equivalent for an invention, and  that is hardly to be expected.  But granting that, there would still  remain an insuperable objection to the plan, in the lack of any  provision for the industrial development of inventions.  Usually the  inventor's task has barely begun when his invention is apparently  completed; the hardest part is to introduce it and make it a  financial success.  For this, much time and labor and ready cash are  demanded; and who would be willing to meet the demand, if, when all  was done, any one could step in and reap all the profit, without  trouble or risk?  

Here comes in the advantage of the patent-law to manufacturers.   To produce cheaply usually requires an expensive plant, and  generally a long series of preliminary experiments, and it would be  downright folly to sink capital in that way in the absence of the  protection which patents afford.  The charge that patents destroy  natural competition and so arrest the desire for improvements is  refuted by all experience.  It is in this country, where patents are  numerous and easily obtained, that improved machines and processes  are most rapidly introduced, as in textile manufactures, in  watch-making, and shoe-making; and not in Switzerland, where until  recently no patents have been granted, or in England and Germany,  where patents have been hard to get.  In the agitation of this  question in Switzerland, after the Centennial Exhibition had  revealed to the manufacturers of that country the secret of their  failing trade, the prominent manufacturer, Edward Dubied, said:  

"Messrs. Favre-Perret, Bally, and David,      our commissioners  to the Philadelphia Exhibition, call for a patent-law in  Switzerland, as a means for perfecting our industries.  The author  of these lines regards the institution of patents as the first and  indispensable measure, without which any other will be utterly  useless, for reaching the end we all have in view.  If he especially  insists on this point, it is because he has the advantage over the  gentlemen he has named, of spending twenty-five years as engineer  and machine-builder in a patent-granting country, — namely,  France, — before he established himself as manufacturer in  Switzerland.  He can, therefore, bring his own experience to the  support of their demand, and he assures his fellow-citizens that a  law for the protection of property in inventions would be a true  magician's wand among us, completely transforming our system of  manufactures, and raising us in a short time, in a natural manner  and with less effort than we should expect, to a level with the  nations most advanced in the arts."  

Some six or eight years ago a strenuous effort was made in  England to secure a radical change in, or the abolition of, the  English patent-law.  The Parliamentary committee had before them a  large number of inventors, manufacturers and others, and collected  nearly 500 closely printed quarto pages of testimony.  In the final  report of the committee, it was set down as established by the  inquiry that the privilege conferred by the grant of letters-patent  promotes the progress of manufactures, by causing many important  inventions to be introduced and developed more rapidly than would  otherwise be the case; that the same privilege leads to the  introduction and publication of numerous improvements, each of minor  character, but the sum of which contributes greatly to the progress  of industry; and that it does not appear that the granting of  pecuniary rewards could be substituted, with advantage to the public  interest, for the temporary privilege conferred by letters-patent.  

The experience of the British colonies adds practical  demonstration of these truths.  The colonies of the southern  hemisphere began with what is called free trade in ideas; but it  proved a losing game.  A patent-law had to be adopted, because, as  its proposers said, they could not get inventions without a  patent-system, and without inventions no rapid development of their  industries was possible.  Canada tried a shrewder plan, and gave  patents to native inventors, but denied them to outsiders.  It was  thought that Canadian manufacturers would gain by exemption from the  charges of Yankee inventors, and would yet have all the advantage of  their improvements.  But the plan worked badly; Yankee inventions  were free to all, and for that very reason no one dared to put his  money into them.  The law was changed; the rights of all inventors  were respected; and now the manufacturing industries of Canada are  progressing wonderfully.  

From the replies received to a letter of inquiry widely  circulated by our Department of State a few years ago, it appeared  that from three-fourths to nine-tenths of the capital invested in  manufacturing establishments in this country had been attracted by  the protection offered by patents.  And the progress of our  manufactures has been exactly coincident with the activity of our  inventors.  In 1850, the products of our mechanical industries were  valued at  $100,000,000.  In 1860 they amounted to $11,800,000,000.   By 1870 they had increased to $4,200,000,000; and, in spite of  financial disturbances, the census of 1880 will show an increase not  less remarkable.  The number of patents issued furnishes a safe  basis for this prediction.  About 1850 they averaged less than 1,000  a year.  In 1860 they bad risen to 3,000 a year.  In 1870 they had  jumped to over 7,000; and now they exceed 16,000 a year.  The  progress of manufactures westward coincides with the geographical  distribution of the patentees.  In 1850 the mechanical industries of  the six great western states produced considerably less than half as  much as those of New England.  In 1871 they were nearly equal;  to-day they are unquestionably far ahead.  

We are apt to think of our country as primarily an agricultural  country; we do, indeed, excel all other lands in that direction,  thanks chiefly to our inventors; yet the value of the products  turned out by our manufacturing establishments last year was very  nearly double that of our agricultural products.  Even the states  which are above all others agricultural in character — the states  next north of the Ohio River — are remarkable rather for the  magnitude of their manufacturing interests.  As long ago as 1870, as  maybe seen by the census statistics of that year, the manufactured  products of the seven leading agricultural states — Ohio, Indiana,  Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa and Missouri — exceeded in value  their agricultural products.  And the development of mechanical  industries in those states has been amazingly rapid since that date.        In Ohio, for instance, the manufactured products in 1870  reached the enormous sum of $269,713,000; in 1875 they were worth  $400,000,000.  Will anybody be so foolish as to say that the  agricultural interests of Ohio were not directly advanced by her  growth in mechanical industries, — by the home markets for farm  products created by the thousands of artisans added to the ranks of  consumers?  

There remains to be considered the influence of the  patent-system upon the working classes, and upon the community at  large.  How do inventions affect the laborer?  Take the case at its  worst, where the substitution of machinery for muscle has been most  rapid — as in agriculture, textile manufactures, shoe-making, sewing,  and so on.  The logic of uncritical thinkers on this point runs  somewhat in this wise:  Before the introduction of machinery, or of  improved machinery, so many hands turned out so much work.  Now, the  annual product is ten times as great.  Therefore there ought to be  ten times as many hands employed.  But there are only twice as many.   Behold what a deadly blow machinery has given to labor!  It never  occurs to such distressed labor-lovers to ask where the extra hands  they say should now be employed could have come from.  In every  instance where an industry has been modified by the introduction of  machinery, the demand for labor has been increased beyond anything  that could have been possible without machinery.  Machinery reduces  cost; cheapness multiplies consumers; to supply the widened market  a larger annual product is necessary; then comes an increased demand  for labor.  That is the universal rule.  In most cases a thousand  years of machineless progress would not suffice to provide for  hand-labor the employment which machine-fearing critics falsely  assume to have been taken away by machinery from — operatives unborn!  

In estimating the influence of machinery upon farm-labor, it  will not do to calculate the number of men it would take to sow by  hand and reap with a sickle the millions of bushels of wheat and  other grain the country produced last year, and then say that the  excess over the number actually employed was so many men shut out  from farm-work by patent seeders and reaping-machines.  It is to  machinery that we owe the possibility of any grain crops at all  throughout the larger part of the grain-producing  interior, — certainly any crop that would bear transportation to  market.  Without machinery for saving time and labor, for doing work  that man's unaided hands could never compass, nine-tenths of our  broad land would still be a wilderness.  And as with agriculture, so  with all our industries; they could have but a feeble existence, or  none, in the absence of the inventions that have given them life and  character.  

How much of the wealth and prosperity of our country, north and  south, has been based on cotton!  Yet how few realize the  indebtedness of the cotton interests to two inventors — Lowell and  Whitney.  The one created a demand for American cotton, the other  made it possible to meet that demand.  Arkwright's machinery could  do nothing with the American staple, and only an insignificant  quantity was called for by the hand-spinners.  Not until Lowell's  machinery was set up here and subsequently in England did the  American staple become an article of commerce.  When Whitney  invented his gin for separating cottonseed from the fiber,  eighty-five years ago, four pounds of cleaned cotton was accounted  a day's work for a man.  With Whitney's first machine a man could  clean seventy pounds.  To-day the perfected cotton-gin will do that  work in ten minutes!  Fifteen hundred thousand men, working all the  year, could not have cleaned by hand our last year's crop.  At what  rate of wages could they have done the work and left a margin of  cost which would allow the product to be transported to New  Hampshire, and converted into cloth to be sold at from three to four  cents a yard?  It is estimated that 200,000,000 people are now  reached by machine-made cottons.  Three times as many more remain to  be reached, the only barrier being the cost of production.  The  invention of a cotton-picking machine would effect a large part of  the required reduction in cost.  Will any one say that the amount of  labor employed upon cotton would be diminished in this country, if  a cotton-picking machine should displace ninety-nine out of every  hundred cotton pickers now employed?  The increased demand for  cotton, owing to the diminished cost, would give them plenty to do,  even in the cotton-field in picking-time.  

It is not denied that the introduction of machinery into an  established industry often seriously affects the laborer.  To those  who are able and willing to adjust themselves to the new conditions,  the change is almost invariably beneficial.       Those who cannot,  or will not, fare hard.  Sometimes an invention wipes out a  previously profitable industry; the only thing its followers can do  under such circumstances is to try something else.  Art is but  little less merciless than nature; and with every step forward in  civilization, the harder becomes the lot of those who lag behind.   We have seen how inventions of the highest utility to the race may  bear very heavily on moneyed interests for a time.  It is equally so  with labor interests.  Take the supposed case of cheap aluminium.   It would necessitate not only a large re-adjustment of capital, but  a radical change of occupation on the part of thousands of more or  less skilled workers in iron.  Should any large body of them say, as  they would be likely to:  "We belong to the iron-founders' union;  our business is to make iron; we wont have anything to do with your  newfangled metal, and we will destroy every clay-bank foundry you  dare to put up," is it not certain that sooner or later they would  go to the wall severely, — and deserve to?  

The complaint that machinery robs the laborer of his only  capital is entirely unfounded.  Machinery never lessened the amount  of work to be done, though it has constantly changed the character  of the work.  The labor-saving machinery employed in agriculture is  almost entirely the product of the inventions of the past thirty  years.  In no part of the world has the introduction of such  machinery been more general or more rapid than in the grain-growing  states of the West.  The result is shown in the census reports.   During the ten years ending in 1860, the farm hands of those states  increased in number more than fifty per cent.  During the next ten,  in spite of the losses of the war, the increase was about thirty per  cent.  During the same twenty years, the population of the country  as a whole increased only sixty-seven per cent.  

When Walter Hunt invented his sewing-machine in 1838, his wife  protested that it would throw all the sewing women out of  employment, and persuaded him to suppress it.  Howe's and Singer's  and no end of other machines have come since then, and yet there is  work for women to do.  Notwithstanding the thousands of family  machines in use, the number of persons earning a living with the  sewing-machine in this country is to-day much greater in proportion  to the population than was the number of tailors and sewing women  before the invention of the machine, which a recent pretended  labor-lover has classed with the steam-engine as one of the two  worst evils that ever befell mankind.  In noting its influence upon  labor, we must not forget the 20,000 or more mechanics employed in  our sewing-machine factories, and the thousands of others engaged in  mining and making the iron, cutting and sawing the lumber, and in  transporting and preparing these raw materials for the machines and  their cases; nor the men employed in making the machinery used in  the construction of sewing-machines, and in transporting and selling  the finished product.  Counting these, the invention appears in its  true light as a great creator of labor; and the average wages of the  persons directly or indirectly employed by the sewing-machine is  doubtless four or five times that of the old-time sewers.  

It is but a little while since a metropolitan paper of high rank  pointed to the shoe business as furnishing a forcible illustration  of the disastrous competition of machinery with men.  The truth is  that while within twenty years, not less than eighty-five per cent.  of the work done on factory boots and shoes has been turned over to  machinery, there are to-day more men at work in shoe-factories than  then, and more than would now be employed except for machinery.  It  is but another illustration of the old industrial paradox.  During  these years of rapid progress in invention, the cost of materials  has advanced, wages have nearly doubled, and the quality of factory  boots and shoes has been improved twenty-five per cent.; yet the  cost of manufacture has been so much reduced by new and improved  machinery that American shoes have not only excluded the  foreign-made from our market, but have successfully invaded the  markets of the whole world.  As a natural consequence, many more  shops are required not only in New England, but throughout the  middle states and the West; more workmen are employed in  shoe-factories; higher wages are paid; and a great multitude of  other men are furnished with employment in tanning the additional  leather used, in packing and transporting and selling the additional  product, and in making shoe-makers' machinery and implements.  

One of the prime conditions of our being able to manufacture for  ourselves, let alone the outside world, is the improvement of  mechanical processes due to our inventors.  At least four-fifths of  the industries of the country have been made possible by such means.   Thirty-five years ago all carpets      were made by hand, and there  was no labor so ill-paid in this country as to make carpet-weaving  profitable among us; to-day our production of carpets is larger than  that of any other nation.  Then it took a man and a helper all day  to make seven yards of Brussels carpet; now a girl tending an  American loom will weave fifty yards in a day.  Machinery does what  hands could not; and so we owe to it an industry that yields over  thirty million dollars' worth of useful and ornamental products a  year; keeps at home many millions that formerly went abroad; and  furnishes profitable employment to hundreds of native operatives.  

Then think of the many labor-creating inventions, and the novel  industries founded on them, — the printing press, the telegraph, the  photograph, hard rubber, vulcanized fiber, artificial stone,  building paper, electroplating, the sand-blast, and a thousand other  operations and products, which in the aggregate add enormously to  the demand for labor.  "New England has invested a great deal of  capital in her leading manufactures," said a prominent eastern man,  not long since; "yet her real strength lies in the numerous small  things in which she stands unequaled.  So many things are required  in our civilization, that the absence of the very smallest of these  `Yankee notions' would be missed by thousands, both here and  abroad."  And by none would they be more missed than by the  thousands of skilled artisans to whom they furnish steady and  profitable employment.  These Yankee notions are invariably  patented; and they are an especial product of the American system.   In Europe the same inventions could scarcely be patented; and,  lacking the protection which a patent affords, they would never be  largely or cheaply produced or generally adopted.  

To the common assertion that machinery lessens wages and  subordinates mind and muscle to brute matter, the proper reply is,  where is the proof?  It is only in machine-using countries that  labor is at all well paid, and the pay is best where machinery is  most used.  The reports of our United States consuls may be studied  with profit in this connection.  A comparison of the wages paid  to-day in our home industries of every sort, compared with those  paid before machinery was introduced, and the purchasing power of  such wages, will be equally instructive.  

The complaint that machinery lessens the dignity and worth of  industrial manhood has been conclusively answered by Professor  Shaler.  Says the Swiss centennial commissioner, Bally, in his  pamphlet "Look out for yourselves," addressed to his  fellow-manufacturers:  "I am satisfied from my knowledge that no  people has made in so short a time so many useful inventions as the  Americans; and if to-day machinery apparently does all the work, it  by no means reduces the workman to a machine.  He uses it as a  machine, it is true, but he is always thinking about some  improvement to introduce into it; and often his thoughts lead to  fine inventions or useful improvements."  

In an appendix to the same pamphlet, after noting several lines  of production in which American competition has become a serious  matter to European manufacturers, and showing that in intelligence  and productive capacity the Swiss workman compares with the American  as one to four.  M. Dubied says:  "Our readers are perhaps  astonished that we insist upon a patent-system as of the first  necessity; but we shall justify this by showing that the protection  of property in inventions develops the desire for technical  instruction; while the absence of such legal protection is nothing  less than a premium given to ignorance to the detriment of inventive  talent."  

Some years ago the writer described our Patent-Office as an  industrial university of the best sort, doing true university work  in examining and certifying the results of practical study.  He has  seen no reason for changing the opinion.  No student ever prized a  degree more highly than our mechanics do a patent; and the granting  of a thousand or fifteen hundred patents a month means that no small  portion of our industrial population are hard at work exploring "the  untried possibilities of nature," as Professor Shaler happily  expresses it.  "So long as we can have this sort of training applied  each year in larger and larger share to our trade life," he says,  "we may feel the more hopeful of the educational influences at work  in that part of society, we have therein something that gives in  large part the character of results attained in scientific training  of a high grade, as well as the general results which are attained  by all well-directed training, — the habit of, and desire for,  continuous, absorbing mental labor."  

We have studied the patent-system with reference to the  inventor, the manufacturer and farmer, and the laborer; and have  found it, in the main, of vast and positive advantage to each.  How  does it affect society and social conditions generally?         

Our answer would be: by extending the scope and capacity of  life; by multiplying the comforts and conveniences of living; by  cheapening and improving the necessities and attainable luxuries of  all classes.  It is invention, more than any other social factor,  that makes it possible to say, —     

"Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay!"    

How often do we hear the remark, such or such a thing is dear,  because it is patented; when the real state of the case is, that if  it were not for the patent, the thing would be unattainable at any  price.  In a speech against the patent-system before the  Congressional committee already referred to, the attorney of the  Western Railway Association said:  "Even so simple a thing as a loaf  of bread pays tribute to twenty-one classes of patents, in each of  which many patents are now alive, — the plow-share, point, handles  and tackle; the harrower, the seed-sower, the cultivator, the  harvester, the thresher, and the separator; the bag, the holder of  the bag, and the strap or string with which it is tied; the bolts,  the hopper, the stones, and the gearing of the mill; the yeast or  baking-powder, the oven, the extension table, and the dishes, are  each subject to patents to which tribute is paid."  

The inference he would have drawn from all this is, that the  bread we eat costs more than it ought to by its share of each and  all the alleged tributes.  But that is arrant nonsense, as no one  knows better, probably, than the clever advocate himself.  A patent  cannot touch what already exists except to improve or cheapen it.   The only way in which it can be of advantage to the holder — except  in rare instances where an invention may be suppressed to prevent  costly changes in the holder's plant or processes — is by enabling  him to offer an entirely new and useful article at a price the world  will pay; an improved article at or below the current price; or a  standard article below the current price.  Otherwise there is no  chance for him to compete with what already exists, and his patent  is pecuniarily worthless.  The possibility of any basis for the  tribute-taking charge rests entirely on the assumption that the  progress of invention would be the same in the absence of the  patent-system, — an assumption which all experience refutes.  

That the cost of our bread is affected by patents is most true;  but not in the direction Mr. Raymond would have it thought.  Note  the general effect of two or three of them.  The patented  improvements in plows are many; those of Nourse in lines of draught,  now generally adopted by plow-makers, reduced the cost of plowing,  according to the practical tests of the New York Agricultural  Society, forty-two percent.  Rating the cost of plowing at one  dollar an acre, a low figure, this one improvement saves our bread  producers not less than $50,000,000 a year.  Another improvement,  the substitution of chilled-iron for cast-steel in the mold-board of  plows, lessened their cost considerably, and, it is said, doubled  their durability.  Taking the average life of the 5,000,000 plows in  use throughout the country at five years, their annual depreciation  from wear must be between ten and fifteen million dollars; half this  sum saved in addition to the saving in cost, helps still further to  cheapen bread.  There have been many improvements in seeders during  the past twenty years, in which time their price has been reduced  some fifty per cent.  One of the advantages of these machines is a  regular placing of the seed at a depth sufficient to prevent  winter-killing, making a gain, or preventing a loss, of from  one-eighth to one-fourth of the crop of winter wheat.  The lowest  figure gives a gain of forty million bushels on a year's crop.  By  the celerity and cheapness of its work, the combined reaper and  binder, which the "bread or blood league" object to, has proved its  capacity to save the country  $100,000,000 on the cost of a single  years' crop, — another tribute which our bread not pays to, but is  relieved from paying by, machinery.  An Ohio farmer, as reported by  Mr. Coffin, kept exact account of the cost of raising corn for three  years, when approved double-shovel cultivators were used.  The  highest cost was twelve cents, and the lowest nine cents a bushel.   Any one who has hoed corn by hand can estimate the probable saving  per bushel by the use of machinery, and the aggregate saving on a  crop of thirteen hundred million bushels.  But that is not what  attention is specially called to here.  There are cultivators and  cultivators.  Using an improved machine, the same farmer kept  account of cost for three more years, during which the highest cost  was eight and a half cents, and the lowest seven cents a bushel.   The difference between the use of a good machine and a better, would  therefore appear to lie somewhere between  $25,000,000 and  $50,000,000 in the cost of one year's      crop.  Any one who  desires more abundant evidence on this and related points is  respectfully referred to the arguments of Mr. Coffin and his  associates, before the patent committee last winter. (Government  Printing-Office: Washington, 1878.)  

There remains to be noticed briefly the objection to patents  which most people think they feel severely, and that is that they  add to the necessary cost of industrial products a certain amount  known as the inventor's royalty.  Sometimes this is the case; but  even at its worst the increase of cost is nothing like what is  currently believed.  On sewing-machines, for example, the royalties  on all the patents used in a machine would not amount to a quarter  of the fee of the agent who sold the machine; a charge that was not  excessive, when we take into account the fact that the seller had  not only to find his customer and persuade him to buy a machine, but  also teach him how to use it.  The cost of introducing new  inventions is, indeed, one of the chief causes of their  expensiveness compared with standard articles.  This appears very  strikingly in the case of  agricultural machinery, the salesman's  fee exceeding the inventor's aggregate royalty many times.  The  license fees covering all the patents on reapers have rarely  exceeded $10; on the more expensive automatic binders they have been  about twice as much, — not two per cent. of the saving effected by  their use.  The patents on all the great reaper inventions have run  out.  Any one is free to make machines like those which were  considered almost perfect twenty years ago; but no one can afford to  make them, because no farmer can afford to use them in competition  with improved machines.  The same is true in many other departments;  in most textile industries, for example.  Since 1860, there has been  an entire revolution in cotton manufacturing; and if we may believe  the testimony of Governor Swan of New Hampshire, himself a great  manufacturer, machines in use ten years ago are obsolete to-day, and  are broken up for old iron.  Crompton's fancy-woolen loom marked an  era in the history of that industry.  In 1850 it threw the shuttle  fifty times a minute; to-day the shuttle is thrown one hundred and  eighty times a minute.  The improved loom of 1876 produces sixty per  cent. more than the loom of 1850, with a saving of fifty per cent.  in labor, and more than that in repairs; yet Mr. Crompton says that  as regards capacity the power-loom is still in its infancy.  His pay  as an inventor would add but a fraction of a cent to the cost of  each yard of the product of a loom, — or a small fraction of the  saving effected by the improvement.  

From the inquiries made by our State Department, already  referred to, it appeared that inventors' royalties would not average  five per cent. of the cost of patented articles, most estimates  falling far within this limit.  The aggregate royalties on all the  machinery used in shoe-factories was given by the representative of  the Shoe and Leather Association before the patent committee, as  three and a quarter cents a pair for fine sewed work, and two cents  for pegged work and a prominent manufacturer assured Mr. Storrow  that the royalties on all the machines used in the best equipped  shops were less than would be the rent of the additional room that  would be required to do the work by hand.  In multitudes of cases,  where the inventor is also the manufacturer, the advantage of the  patent lies solely in enabling him to produce a better article than  his competitors, at or below the current rate.  

It is needless to pile up evidence of the value of inventions as  factors of individual and national prosperity.  They are the  main-spring of industrial progress, and to a large extent they  furnish the motive power as well as the means and conditions of our  modern civilization.  If the world still remains a hard place for  the incompetent, the thriftless, the uncivilized, it is no worse  than it always has been, though its contrasts may be greater.  The  inevitable struggle for existence never has been, nor is ever likely  to be, very pleasant to those destined to go under.  On the other  hand, life is on a higher level now than ever before; more can enjoy  it, and the facilities for, and the scope of, human comfort and  happiness to-day are infinitely beyond what was possible before the  age of invention set in.  

For a very large share of all that makes life better worth  living now than a century ago, we are indebted to American  inventors; and if American inventors are more active and fertile  than those of any other nation, as all nations admit, it is because  our patent-system reaches a larger proportion of the population.  It  is this feature of the system that the thoughtful of other lands  were quick to appreciate when they saw its effects at our Centennial  Exhibition, — the feature which all have promptly imitated in their  new or amended systems.  Said one of the      commissioners from  Switzerland, — which has since substantially adopted, our  system, — Many European states have also a patent-system; but as they  see in it, first of all, a source of revenue to the state, those of  moderate fortune can hardly obtain a patent.  In Europe the inventor  anxiously hides his secret from all eyes until he is in possession  of a patent.  The Americans do not know this uneasiness, for there  an inventor alone can take a patent, which he afterward has the  right to sell if he pleases.  Every intelligent man has thus before  him the possibility of a fortune, often by a very slight  improvement, and this keeps in ceaseless activity the intelligent  part of the population."  

Said one of the English commissioners, Sir William Thomson:   "Judged by its results in benefiting the public, both by stimulating  inventors and by giving a perseveringly practical turn to their  labors, the American patent-law must be admitted to be most  successful, and the beneficence of its working was very amply  illustrated throughout the American region of the Exhibition, where  indeed it seemed that every good thing deserving a patent was  patented.  I asked one inventor of a very good invention, `Why do  you not patent in England?' the reply was, `The conditions in  England are too onerous.'  England undoubtedly loses much of  the benefit which might be had from the inventiveness of Englishmen,  through the want, in English patent-law, of encouragement and  protection to inventors unsupported by capitalists."   

Stress is laid upon this point here, and upon the merits of our  patent-system as a whole, that popular attention may be sharply  called to the general excellence of the system, and the need of  watchfully guarding it from the attacks of those who mean it harm.  

Very few are aware how seriously the integrity of the system was  assailed in Congress last winter, or how near the assault came to  success, owing to the ignorance of many members from the West and  South with regard to its nature, purpose, and influence.  The  attempt is sure to be repeated; and though the unjust and  destructive tendency of the more obnoxious amendments proposed was  well exposed in committee, the work may have to be done over again  the coming winter.  The subject deserves thorough discussion; and it  is hoped this paper may be instrumental in provoking such  discussion.  

          