---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Dostoievsky
source: 
---

                              
# DOSTOIEVSKY
  BY W. B. TRITES

      THE Slav peril has been much talked about of late.  Now  the Slav peril means, if it means anything, Russian thought;  and Russian thought, as it reveals itself in Russian literature and Russian dancing, seems to me the most splendid and  most desirable thought in the world to-day.    

  Take Russian dancing.  The dancing of France and England and Germany and America is negligible; but the Russian Ballet — the Russian Ballet, led by Nijinsky — is so profoundly beautiful that it has lifted dancing up to the plane  whereon stand tragedy and sculpture.    

  As Nijinsky leads the world's dancers, so the world's  novelists are led by Dostoievsky, Gogol, Tolstoi and Turgenieff.  *Crime and Punishment, Dead Souls, War and Peace*  and *Fathers and Sons* are to the novels of the rest of the  world as, I might almost say, the Russian Ballet is to a cake-walk.    

  Dostoievsky, the greatest of the Russian novelists, is also  to-day the most discussed one.  Dostoievsky has had of late  a singular revival.  It is his striking "modernity" (modernity is the supreme test of art, since only the truth remains always modern) which has brought about this revival.  Dostoivesky is said to have been influenced by Dickens, and  occasionally, indeed, I seem to detect a Dickens touch in him;  but how old-fashioned Dickens seems to-day, while how modern seems Dostoievsky!  Dostoievsky seems, indeed, as modern as Dr. Johnson in his *Life of Savage*, that large, profound, and tender study in psychology which might have  been written yesterday, if anybody had been alive yesterday  capable of writing it.    

  I desire to consider Dostoievsky from one angle alone —  the angle, namely, of the dish rag.  *The angle of the dish         rag*: to interpret that phrase, let me quote the following passage from *The Double*:    He must not suffer them to insult him, to trample him under foot  like a dish rag.  As a matter of fact, if some one really attempted to  make a dish rag of Mr. Goliadkine, the attempt would, perhaps, succeed without difficulty and without danger (Mr. Goliadkine often admitted it himself).  He would then become a dish rag; he would no  longer be Mr. Goliadkine, but a foul dish rag, not a commonplace dish  rag, however, but an aspiring one; a dish rag with fine feelings; fine  feelings concealed deep within his wet folds, but fine feelings all the  same.    

Dostoievsky shows us — to speak fantastically — the souls  of dish rags.  He lets hear the lamentations of the lowest,  the vilest, the most shameless.  From the mud the drunkard  speaks.  The coward speaks from his black skulking-place.  Thieves speak, and the murderers of old women; harlots  speak, and men who live on harlots' gains.  And lo, all those  voices are beautiful.  They are sad and beautiful.  All those  ruined souls are like you and me.  Like you and me, they  love virtue.  Like you and me, they loathe vice.  And they  mourn, down there in the morass, they mourn their incredible fall as you and I would mourn if, by some incredible mischance, we ourselves fell.    

Dostoievsky reveals the soul of the lowly and the degraded.  That is his essence.  That is the one thing which  he alone can do.  The souls of our great picturesque,  grandiose sinners have been revealed to us, lamenting in  their jewelled robes, their marble palaces, from time immemorial.  But the soul of the drunkard kept in drink by his  harlot daughter: the soul of the elderly coward pawnbroker  whose girl-wife kills herself rather than endure his petty  cruelties: it is Dostoievsky alone who reveals the terrible  beauty of these.    

But assertion is nothing without proof.  Let me, then, try,  by means of a truncated and weak paraphrase of Dostoievsky's most famous passage, to prove that he can take these  degraded beings and show us that they have souls, souls  shimmering with beauty and splendor.    

If ever there was a degraded soul it was Marmeladoff  — and it is the famous Marmeladoff passage in *Crime and  Punishment* that I am going to paraphrase.  Raskolnikoff,  the young student, enters a vile drinking-bar.  There, as he  quaffs his beer, a ragged, half-drunken, but educated         stranger of fifty or more begins to talk to him.  This is  Marmeladoff.  And whilst Marmeladoff, half-drunk, sips his  vodka and talks, the landlord and the boozers in the filthy  bar listen, laugh, and interrupt:    "I am a swine; but she — she is a lady.  On me the mark of the  beast; but Catherine Ivanovna, my wife, is a person of refinement,  the daughter of an official.  I admit that I am a rogue, but my wife  has a liberal mind, fine feelings, and an education.  And yet — oh, if  she would pity me! . . .  But Catherine Ivanovna, notwithstanding the grandeur of her soul, is unjust.  Not once has she ever shown  me pity.  But — that is my character; I am a brute."  .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .    "We live in a cold room; this winter she took a chill; she coughs  and spits blood.  When I married her, she was a widow with three  little children.  Her first husband was an infantry officer, with whom  she had eloped.  She adored him, but he gambled, fell foul of the law,  and died.  Towards the end he beat her. . . .    "Her husband's death left her alone with those three young children in a wild and desolate district.  It was there I met her.  I have  not the heart to describe her destitution. . . .  And, young man,  I, a widower, with a fourteen-year-old daughter, offered my hand to  the poor woman because her suffering grieved my heart.  She accepted  my proposal, weeping, sobbing, and wringing her hands; but she accepted it, for she had nowhere to go. . . .    "During a full year I did my duty honestly.  But I lost my place  through no fault of my own.  It was then that I began to drink.  . . .  I have no idea how we live or how we pay our way.    "And meanwhile my daughter was growing up.  As to what her  stepmother made her suffer, well, I prefer to pass over that in silence.  And now, young man, in all sincerity, do you believe that a young  girl, poor but honest, can really earn her living?  If she has no special  ability, she may make fifteen kopecks a day, though even that —  And the children are dying of hunger.  Catherine Ivanovna walks  the room and wrings her hands.  'Lazybones,' she says to my daugh-ter, 'aren't you ashamed to live on here in idleness?'  I was lying  down at the time — come, out with the truth, I was drunk. . . .  It was then past five o'clock; I saw Sonia rise, put on her hat, and  go out.    "At eight o'clock she returns.  She goes straight to Catherine  Ivanovna, and silently, without uttering a single word, she places  thirty silver roubles on the table before my wife.  Then she takes our  large green handkerchief (it is a handkerchief that does duty for all  the family), and she wraps her head in it, and she lies down on the  bed, her face turned to the wall; but her shoulders and her body  shook with a continual tremor.  (As for me, I was still in the same  condition.)  And at that moment, young man, I saw Catherine Ivanovna,         she also in silence, go and kneel beside Sonetchka's little bed.  She spent all the evening there on her knees, kissing my daughter's  feet and refusing to rise.  Afterward they both fell asleep together,  in one another's arms — both together — both together — yes — and I —  I was still there, overcome with drunkenness. . . .    "Who, then, will have pity on a man like me?  Can you, sir, pity  me now? . . .  Why pity me, you ask?  It is true; there is no  reason.  They ought to crucify me; put me on the cross, and not  pity me! . . .  But He who had pity on all mankind, He who  understood all, He will pity us; He is the only judge.  He will come  on the last day, and He will ask, 'Where is the girl who pities her earthly  father and did not turn away in horror from the vicious drunkard?'  And He will say, 'Come, I have already forgiven thee once.  Now,  again, thy sins are remitted thee because thou hast greatly loved.'  All  will be judged by Him, and He will forgive all, the good and the bad,  the wise and the foolish.  And when He has done with the others, then  it will be our turn.  'Come unto me, ye, also,' He will say.  'Come  unto me, drunkards; come unto me, cowards; come unto me, ye  lewd!'  And we will all approach without fear.  And He will say,  'Ye are swine.  Ye bear the mark of the beast.  But, nevertheless,  come.'  And the sage, the intelligent, will say, 'Lord, why dost thou  receive them?'  And He will answer, 'I receive them, O ye sage; I  receive them, O ye intelligent, because not one of them believes himself worthy of my favor.'  And he will hold out his arms to us, and  we will run to Him, and we will burst into tears — and we will understand all.  Yes, all then will be understood by everybody.  And Catherine Ivanovna, she, too, will understand.  Lord, thy Kingdom  come!"    

That is the most famous passage in Dostoievsky.  Whenever you discuss Dostoievsky with a Russian, he will ask  eagerly, "Do you remember the Marmeladoff passage in  *Crime and Punishment?"*  You nod.  Then he asks in what  language you read the passage.  But whether you reply that  you read it in English or in French or in German, he will  say sadly, "Ah, but it's only in Russian that it can really  be appreciated."  And that is my apology for the paraphrase  I have given, a paraphrase wherefrom much has been  omitted.  Yet, perhaps, for all the omissions, for all my  clumsy paraphrasing, the reader will grasp something of the  beauty of this wonderful passage.  What notes of horrible  and heart-breaking splendor Dostoievsky strikes from the  soul of Marmeladoff!    

Marmeladoff would not appeal to the conventional reader.         He has not even youth — youth with its promise of reform —  to recommend him.  No, he is past fifty.  A drunkard, he lies  at home sleeping off his drunkenness; then he snatches up a  pair of his wife's stockings and steals forth again.  Or he  goes to his daughter, the harlot, for drink money.  In fact,  the half-bottle that he consumes while conversing with Raskolnikoff was bought with his daughter's last thirty kopecks.  No, Marmeladoff would not recommend himself to the general.  He is a dish rag, nothing more; and yet — he feels his  degradation as I would feel if, in my later years, by some  unhappy chance, such degradation fell on me.    

The novel of *Crime and Punishment* is itself an exposition of the motive which I have propounded in Dostoievsky's  essence.  This long and superb novel concerns a murder.  An old woman money-lender and her sister are murdered by  a young man for purposes of robbery.  And what a murder  it is!  None of the blood, none of the horror, is spared us.  None of the pathos is spared us, either.  How pathetic this  vivid picture of the sister: "The young man launched himself upon her, the hatchet upraised; and the unhappy  woman's lips assumed the plaintive expression which one  sees in very little children when they begin to be afraid of  something, look fixedly at the object that frightens them,  and are on the point of bursting into tears."  The police  take up the case.  The murderer is finally captured.  And  that, crudely, is the plot of *Crime and Punishment*.  What  would our modern novelists do with such a plot?  They  would not touch it.  They would turn up their noses at it.  It would be too low and vulgar for them.  Sir Conan Doyle  alone might consider it; he might make of it a conventional  detective tale.  Dostoievsky, however, describing the murder  in the beginning of the story, then describing the work of  the detectives as the cringing murderer follows it step by  step, obtains a strange, new horror such as the conventional  detective story neither gives nor seeks to give.  But it is not  this strange, new horror which makes *Crime and Punishment*  immortal.  No: it is the fact that the thief, the murderer of  two old women, reveals his soul to us, and his soul is like  Goliadkine's and Marmeladoff's, and yours and mine.    

*Krotkaia* is Dostoievsky's most beautiful short story.  It  is a story about an officer, turned out of the army for cowardice, who, after years of poverty and ignominy, opens a little  pawnshop and prospers.  To him, to this elderly, taciturn         pawnbroker, a beautiful young girl of sixteen comes one day  to pawn a worthless silver brooch.  She is alone and destitute.  She is seeking a place as governess.  The pawnbroker  makes her several advances — advances in both meanings of  the word.  He follows her advertisements in the newspaper  as they grow from day to day more desperate.  On her final  visit he asks her to marry him.  In her childish helplessness  she consents.    

This story is strangely composed.  It is in the form of  a soliloquy, the soliloquy of the pawnbroker, pacing the floor,  distracted with grief, while on a table in her coffin lies the  corpse of Krotkaia, the girl-wife, who had leapt from a high  window to seek in death escape from her unhappy marriage.    

The elderly pawnbroker is well done.  His cruelty to  Krotkaia is a conscientious cruelty, intended for the girl's  own good — no doubt innumerable girls have undergone this  sort of conscientious cruelty at the hands of elderly husbands.  Yes, the pawnbroker is well done; but Krotkaia!  She is a masterpiece indeed.    

To paint a young girl the brush must be dipped in mystery, in dew, in morning haze: but, above all, in mystery.  Ibsen at sixty-five, after his strange love affair with the seventeen-year-old "Princess of Orangia," painted a young  girl well in Hilda Wangel.  All the mystery is there.  And  in Krotkaia, too, all the mystery is there.  But Dostoievsky  had to have two trials at Krotkaia.  There are two versions  of this story.  The first version, in *A Writer's Journal*,  is much the longer, and in it the girl-wife is analyzed  to the core.  She lives, to be sure.  But the mystery, the  lovely dawn mystery, is absent.  Hence the picture is not a  success.    

Dostoievsky came back to Krotkaia again.  He cut out  the analysis of the girl-wife.  He made her beautiful, silent  and mysterious.  The result is perfection.  Krotkaia and  Hilda Wangel are more truly, vividly alive than any two  girls walking with shining eyes and soft laughter down the  street.    

*The Karamazov Brothers* is another novel full of degraded souls.  The subtlest touch in it seems to me to be the  episode of the Pole.  Grouchenka, the beautiful Grouchenka,  had been seduced in her girlhood by a Pole, and now, after  some six or seven years, he is coming back to her.  He had  appeared, to her unsophisticated girl's eyes, noble and dis  tinguished;          she believes that she still loves him; she is even,  in her prosperity, prepared to marry him.  But the Pole  turns out to be a vulgar sharper.  He has come back, he and  his accomplice, only to get hold of Grouchenka's money.  How well the Pole is drawn! — his silly and stupid imitation  of a landed proprietor, the solemn stubbornness that he puts  into his transparent lies, his stupid, hopeless pluck when he  is caught cheating at cards.  And then, when Grouchenka  repulses him, he tries to borrow money from her.  "He began by demanding haughtily two thousand roubles for a  very short term.  No answer came, but he was not discouraged, and his letters followed one after another, always  haughty, but little by little the sum required grew less.  He  descended to a hundred roubles, to twenty-five, to ten.  Finally, Grouchenka received a supplication wherein the two  Poles implored of her a single rouble for the pair of them."  That touch — the two haughty adventurers fallen so low that  they ask for one little rouble to share between them — that  subtle touch of pathos achieves the effect which Dostoievsky  always tries for and seldom misses — the effect of friendship,  nay, of brotherhood, between his characters and ourselves.  Dostoievsky has never drawn a character, now matter how  degraded, how shameless, but the reader must say of him,  "He is my brother."  

                                    W. B. TRITES.            