---
layout: narrative

title: >
    An Entertaining Article
source: 
---

                      
#    MEMORANDA.
  BY MARK TWAIN.  

      
##   AN ENTERTAINING ARTICLE.  

    I take the following paragraph from an article in the Boston  "Advertiser":

    AN ENGLISH CRITIC ON MARK TWAIN.—Perhaps the most successful   flights of the humor of  Mark Twain have been descriptions of the persons who did not  appreciate his humor at all.  We have become familiar with the  Californians who were thrilled with terror by his burlesque of  a newspaper reporter's way of telling a story, and we have heard  of the Pennsylvania clergyman who sadly returned his  "Innocents Abroad" to the book-agent with the remark that "the  man who could shed tears over the tomb of Adam must be an  idiot."  But Mark Twain may now add a much more glorious  instance to his string of trophies.  The "Saturday Review," in its  number of October 8, reviews his book of travels, which has  been republished in England, and reviews it seriously.  We can  imagine the delight of the humorist in reading this tribute to his  power; and indeed it is so amusing in itself that he can hardly  do better than reproduce the article in full in his next monthly  Memoranda.

    [Publishing the above paragraph thus gives me a sort  of authority for reproducing the "Saturday Review's" article in  full in these pages.  I dearly wanted to do it, for I cannot write  anything half so delicious myself.  If I had a cast-iron dog that  could read this English criticism and preserve his austerity, I  would drive him off the doorstep.

—EDITOR MEMORANDA.]        
##   [From the London Saturday Review.]
  REVIEWS OF NEW BOOKS.  

    THE INNOCENTS ABROAD.  A Book of Travels.  By  Mark Twain.  London: Hotten, publisher.  1870.    

Lord Macaulay died too soon.  We never felt this so deeply as  when we finished the last chapter of the above-named  extravagant work.  Macaulay died too soon—for none but he  could mete out complete and comprehensive justice to the  insolence, the impertinence, the presumption, the mendacity,  and, above all, the majestic ignorance of this author.    

To say that the "Innocents Abroad" is a curious book,  would be to use the faintest language—would be to speak of the  Matterhorn as a neat elevation, or of Niagara as being "nice" or  "pretty."  "Curious" is too tame a word wherewith the describe  the imposing insanity of this work.  There is no word that is  large enough or long enough.  Let us, therefore, photograph a  passing glimpse of book and author, and trust the rest to the  reader.  Let the cultivated English student of human nature  picture to himself this Mark Twain as a person capable of doing  the following-described things—and not only doing them, but  with incredible innocence *printing them* calmly and  tranquilly in a book.  For instance:    

He states that he entered a hair-dresser's in Paris to get  shaved, and the first "rake" the barber gave with his razor it  *loosened his "hide" and lifted him out of his chair*.    

This is unquestionably exaggerated.  In Florence he  was so annoyed by beggars that he pretends to have seized and  eaten one in a frantic spirit of revenge.  There is of course no  truth in this.  He gives at full length a theatrical programme  seventeen or eighteen hundred years old, which he professes to  have found in the ruins of the Coliseum, among the dirt and  mould and rubbish.  It is a sufficient comment upon this  statement to remark that even a cast iron programme would not  have lasted so long under such circumstances.  In Greece he  plainly betrays both fright and flight upon one occasion, but  with frozen effrontery puts the latter in this falsely tame form:  "We *sidled* toward the Piraeus."  "Sidled," indeed!  He  does not hesitate to intimate that at Ephesus, when his mule  strayed from the proper course, he got down, took him under  his arm, carried him to the road again, pointed him right,  remounted, and went to sleep contentedly till it was time to  restore the beast to the path once more.  He states that a  growing youth among his ship's passengers was in the constant  habit of appeasing his hunger with soap and oakum between  meals.  In Palestine he tells of ants that came eleven miles to  spend the summer in the desert and brought their provisions  with them; yet he shows by his description of the country that  the feat was an impossibility.  He mentions, as if it were the  most commonplace of matters, that he cut a Moslem in two in  broad daylight in Jerusalem, with Godfrey de Bouillon's sword,  and would have shed more blood *if he had had a graveyard  of his own*.  These statements are unworthy a moment's  attention.  Mr. Twain or any other foreigner who did such a  thing         in Jerusalem would be mobbed, and would infallibly lose  his life.  But why go on?  Why repeat more of his audacious  and exasperating falsehoods?  Let us close fittingly with this  one: he affirms that "in the mosque of St. Sophia at  Constantinople I got my feet so stuck up with a complication of  gums, slime, and general impurity, that *I wore out more  than two thousand pair of bootjacks* getting my books off  that night, and even then some Christian hide peeled off with  them."  It is monstrous.  Such statements are simply  *lies*—there is no other name for them.  Will the reader  longer marvel at the brutal ignorance that pervades the  American nation when we tell him that we are informed upon  perfectly good authority that this extravagant compilation of  falsehoods, this exhaustless mine of stupendous lies, this  "Innocents Abroad," has actually been adopted by the schools  and colleges of several of the States as a text-book!    

But if his falsehoods are distressing, his innocence and  his ignorance are enough to make one burn the book and  despise the author.  In one place he was so appalled at the  sudden spectacle of a murdered man, unveiled by the  moonlight, that he jumped out of window, going through sash  and all, and then remarks with the most childlike simplicity that  he "was not scared, but was considerably agitated."  It puts us  out of patience to note that the simpleton is densely  unconscious that Lucrezia Borgia ever existed off the stage.  He  is vulgarly ignorant of all foreign languages, but is frank  enough to criticize the Italians' use of their own tongue.  He  says they spell the name of their great painter "Vinci, but  pronounce it Vinchy"—and then adds with a naivete possible  only to helpless ignorance, *"foreigners always spell better  than they pronounce*."  In another place he commits the  bald absurdity of putting the phrase "tare an ouns" into an  Italian's mouth.  In Rome he unhesitatingly believes the legend  that St. Philip Neri's heart was so inflamed with divine love that  it burst his ribs—believes it wholly because an author with a  learned list of university degrees strung after his name endorses  it—"otherwise," says this gentle idiot, "I should have felt a  curiosity to know what Philip had for dinner."  Our author  makes a long, fatiguing journey to the Grotto del Cane on  purpose to test its poisoning powers on a dog—got elaborately  ready for the experiment, and then discovered that he had no  dog.  A wiser person would have kept such a thing discreetly to  himself, but with this harmless creature everything comes out.   He hurts his foot in a rut two thousand years old in exhumed  Pompeii, and presently, when staring at one of the cinder-like  corpses unearthed in the next square, conceives the idea that  may be it is the remains of the ancient Street Commissioner,  and straightway his horror softens down to a sort of chirpy  contentment with the condition of things.  In Damascus he  visits the well of Ananias, three thousand years old, and is as  surprised and delighted as a child to find that the water is "as  pure and fresh as if the well had been dug yesterday."  In the  Holy Land he gags desperately at the hard Arabic and Hebrew  Biblical names, and finally concludes to call them  Baldwinsville, Williamsburgh, and so on, *"for convenience  of spelling!"*    

We have spoken thus freely of this man's stupefying  simplicity and innocence, but we cannot deal similarly with his  colossal ignorance.  We do not know where to begin.  And if  we knew where to begin, we certainly would not know where  to leave off.  We will give one more specimen, and one only.   He did not know, until he got to Rome, that Michael Angelo  was dead!  And then, instead of crawling away and hiding his  shameful ignorance somewhere, he proceeds to express a pious,  grateful sort of satisfaction that he is gone and out of his  troubles!    

No, the reader may seek out the author's exhibitions of  his uncultivation for himself.  The book is absolutely  dangerous, considering the multitude and variety of its  misstatements, and the convincing confidence with which they  are made.  And yet it is a text-book in the schools of America.    

The poor blunderer mouses among the sublime  creations of the Old Masters, trying to acquire the elegant  proficiency in art-knowledge, which he has a groping sort of  comprehension is a proper thing for the travelled man to be  able to display.  But what is the manner of his study?  And  what is the progress he achieves?  To what extent does he  familiarize himself with the great pictures of Italy, and what  degree of appreciation does he arrive at?  Read:

    When we see a monk going about with a lion and looking up  into heaven, we know that that is St. Mark.  When we see a  monk with a book and a pen, looking tranquilly up to heaven,  trying to think of a word, we know that that is St. Matthew.   When we see a monk sitting on a rock, looking tranquilly up to  heaven, with a human skull beside him, and without other  baggage, we know that that is St. Jerome.  Because we know        that he is always flying light in the matter of baggage.  When  we see other monks looking tranquilly up to heaven, but having  no trade-mark, we always ask who those parties are.  We do  this because we humbly wish to learn.

    He then enumerates the thousands and thousands of  copies of these several pictures which he has seen, and adds  with accustomed simplicity that he feels encouraged to believe  that when he has seen "SOME MORE" of each, and had a larger  experience, he will eventually "begin to take an absorbing  interest in them"—the vulgar boor.    

That we have shown this to be a remarkable book, we  think no one will deny.  That it is a pernicious book to place in  the hands of the confiding and uninformed, we think we have  also shown.  That the book is a deliberate and wicked creation  of a diseased mind, is apparent upon every page.  Having  placed our judgment thus upon record, let us close with what  charity we can, by remarking that even in this volume there is  some good to be found; for whenever the author talks of his  own country and lets Europe alone, he never fails to make  himself interesting; and not only interesting, but instructive.   No one can read without benefit his occasional chapters and  paragraphs, about life in the gold and silver mines of California  and Nevada; about the Indians of the plains and deserts of the  West, and their cannibalism; about the raising of vegetables in  kegs of gunpowder by the aid of two or three teaspoonfuls of  guano; about the moving of small farms from place to place at  night in wheelbarrows to avoid taxes; and about a sort of cows  and mules in the Humboldt mines, that climb down chimneys  and disturb the people at night.  These matters are not only  new, but are well worth knowing.[^n1] It is a pity the author did not  put in more of the same kind.  His book is well-written and is  exceedingly entertaining, and so it just barely escaped being  quite valuable also.

    [^n1]: Yes,I calculated they were pretty new.  I invented them myself.—MARK TWAIN. 

         