---
layout: narrative

title: >
    The Instinct of Workmanship and the Irksomeness of Labor
source: 
---

              It is one of the commonplaces of the received economic theory  that work is irksome. Many a discussion proceeds on this axiom  that, so far as regards economic matters, men desire above all  things to get the goods produced by labor and to avoid the labor  by which the goods are produced. In a general way the  common-sense opinion is well in accord with current theory on  this head. According to the common-sense-ideal, the economic  beatitude lies in an unrestrained consumption of goods, without  work; whereas the perfect economic affliction is unremunerated  labor. Man instinctively revolts at effort that goes to supply  the means of life.

      No one will accept the proposition when stated in this bald  fashion, but even as it stands it is scarcely an overstatement of  what is implied in the writings of eminent economists. If such an  aversion to useful effort is an integral part of human nature,  then the trail of the Edenic serpent should be plain to all men,  for this is a unique distinction of the human species. A  consistent aversion to whatever activity goes to maintain the  life of the species is assuredly found in no other species of  animal. Under the selective process through which species are  held to have emerged and gained their stability there is no  chance for the survival of a species gifted with such an aversion  to the furtherance of its own life process. If man alone is an  exception from the selective norm, then the alien propensity in  question must have been intruded into his make-up by some  malevolent *deus ex machina*.

      Yet, for all the apparent absurdity of the thing, there is  the fact. With more or less sincerity, people currently avow an  aversion to useful effort. The avowal does not cover all effort,  but only such as is of some use; it is, more particularly, such  effort as is vulgarly recognized to be useful labor. Less        repugnance is expressed as regards effort which brings gain  without giving a product that is of human use, as, for example,  the effort that goes into war, politics, or other employments of  a similar nature. And there is commonly no avowed aversion to  sports or other similar employments that yield neither a  pecuniary gain nor a useful product. Still, the fact that a given  line of effort is useless does not of itself save it from being  odious, as is shown by the case of menial service; much of this  work serves no useful end, but it is none the less repugnant to  all people of sensibility.

      "The economic man," whose lineaments were traced in outline  by the classical economists and filled in by their caricaturists,  is an anomaly in the animal word; and yet, to judge by everyday  popular expressions of inclination, the portrait is not seriously  overdrawn. But if this economic man is to serve as a lay figure  upon which to fit the garment of economic doctrines, it is  incumbent upon the science to explain what are his limitations  and how he has achieved his emancipation from the law of natural  selection. His emancipation from the law is, indeed, more  apparent than substantial. The difference in this respect between  man and his sometime competitors in the struggle for survival  lies not in a slighter but in a fuller adjustment of his  propensities to the purposes of the life of the species. He  distanced them all in this respect long ago, and by so wide an  interval that he is now able, without jeopardy to the life of the  species, to play fast and loose with the spiritual basis of its  survival.

  
      Like other animals, man is an agent that acts in response to  stimuli afforded by the environment in which he lives. Like other  species, he is a creature of habit and propensity. But in a  higher degree than other species, man mentally digests the  content of the habits under whose guidance he acts, and  appreciates the trend of these habits and propensities. He is in  an eminent sense an intelligent agent. By selective necessity he  is endowed with a proclivity for purposeful action. He is  possessed of a discriminating sense of purpose, by force of which        all futility of life or of action is distasteful to him. There  may be a wide divergence between individuals as regards the form  and the direction in which this impulse expresses itself, but the  impulse itself is not a matter of idiosyncrasy, it is a generic  feature of human nature. It is not a trait that occurs  sporadically in a few individuals. Cases occur in which this  proclivity for purposeful action is wanting or is present in  obviously scant measure, but persons endowed in this stepmotherly  fashion are classed as "defective subjects." Lines of descent  which carry this defective human nature dwindle and decay even  under the propitious circumstances of modern life. The history of  hereditarily dependent or defective families is evidence to this  effect.

      Man's great advantage over other species in the struggle for  survival has been his superior facility in turning the forces of  the environment to account. It is to his proclivity for turning  the material means of life to account that he owes his position  as lord of creation. It is not a proclivity to effort, but to  achievement-to the compassing of an end. His primacy is in the  last resort an industrial or economic primacy. In his economic  life man is an agent, not an absorbent; he is an agent seeking in  every act the accomplishment of some concrete, objective,  impersonal end. As this pervading norm of action guides the life  of men in all the use they make of material things, so it must  also serve as the point of departure and afford the guiding  principle for any science that aims to be a theory of the  economic life process. Within the purview of economic theory, the  last analysis of any given phenomenon must run back to this  ubiquitous human impulse to do the next thing.

      All this seems to contradict what has just been said of the  conventional aversion to labor. But the contradiction is not so  sheer in fact as it appears to be at first sight. Its solution  lies in the fact that the aversion to labor is in great part a  conventional aversion only. In the intervals of sober reflection,  when not harassed with the strain of overwork, men's common sense  speaks unequivocally under the guidance of the instinct of  workmanship. They like to see others spend their life to some  purpose, and they like to reflect that their own life is of some  use. All men         have this quasi-aesthetic sense of economic or  industrial merit, and to this sense of economic merit futility  and inefficiency are distasteful. In its positive expression it  is an impulse or instinct of workmanship; negatively it expresses  itself in a deprecation of waste. This sense of merit and demerit  with respect to the material furtherance or hindrance of life  approves, the economically effective act and deprecates economic  futility. It is needless to point out in detail the close  relation between this norm of economic merit and the ethical norm  of conduct, on the one hand, and the aesthetic norm of taste, on  the other. It is very closely related to both of these, both as  regards its biological ground and as regards the scope and method  of its award.

      This instinct of workmanship apparently stands in sheer  conflict with the conventional antipathy to useful effort. The  two are found together in full discord in the common run of men;  but whenever a deliberate judgment is passed on conduct or on  events, the former asserts its primacy in a pervasive way which  suggests that it is altogether the more generic, more abiding  trait of human nature. There can scarcely be a serious question  of precedence between the two. The former is a human trait  necessary to the survival of the species; the latter is a habit  of thought possible only in a species which has distanced all  competitors, and then it prevails only by sufferance and within  limits set by the former. The question between them is, Is the  aversion to labor a derivative of the instinct of workmanship?  and, How has it arisen and gained consistency in spite of its  being at variance with that instinct?

      Until recently there has been something of a consensus among  those who have written on early culture, to the effect that man,  as he first emerged upon the properly human plane, was of a  contentious disposition, inclined to isolate his own interest and  purposes from those of his fellows, and with a penchant for feuds  and brawls. Accordingly, even where the view is met with that men  are by native proclivity inclined to action, there is still  evident a presumption that this native proclivity to action is a  proclivity to action of a destructive kind. It is held that men  are inclined to fight, not to work -that the end of action in the normal case is damage rather than repair. This view would  make the proclivity to purposeful         action an impulse to  sportsmanship rather than to workmanship. In any attempt to fit  this view into an evolutionary scheme of culture it would carry  the implication that in the prehuman or proto-anthropoid phase of  its life the race was a predaceous species, and that the initial  phase of human culture, as well as the later cultural  development, has been substantially of a predatory kind.

      There is much to be said for this view. If mankind is by  derivation a race not of workmen but of sportsmen, then there is  no need of explaining the conventional aversion to work. Work is  unsportsmanlike and therefore distasteful, and perplexity then  arises in explaining how men have in any degree become reconciled  to any but a predaceous life. Apart from the immediate  convenience of this view, it is also enforced by much evidence.  Most peoples at a lower stage of culture than our own are of a  more predatory habit than our people. The history of mankind, as  conventionally written, has been a narrative of predatory  exploits, and this history is not commonly felt to be one-sided  or misinformed. And a sportsmanlike inclination to warfare is  also to be found in nearly all modern communities. Similarly, the  sense of honor, so-called, whether it is individual or national  honor, is also an expression of sportsmanship. The prevalence of  notions of honor may, therefore, be taken as evidence going in  the same direction. And as if to further fortify the claim of  sportsmanship to antiquity and prescriptive standing, the sense  of honor is also noticeably more vivid in communities of a  somewhat more archaic culture than our own.

      Yet there is a considerable body of evidence, both from  cultural history and from the present-day phenomena of human  life, which traverses this conventionally accepted view that  makes man generically a sportsman. Obscurely but persistently,  throughout the history of human culture, the great body of the  people have almost everywhere, in their everyday life, been at  work to turn things to human use. The proximate aim of all  industrial improvement has been the better performance of some  workmanlike task. Necessarily this work has, on the one hand,        proceeded on the basis of an appreciative interest in the work to  be done; for there is no other ground on which to obtain anything  better than the aimless performance of a task. And necessarily  also, on the other hand, the discipline of work has acted to  develop a workmanlike attitude. It will not do to say that the  work accomplished is entirely due to compulsion under a predatory  regime, for the most striking advances in this respect have been  wrought where the coercive force of a sportsmanlike exploitation  has been least.

      The same view is borne out by the expressions of common  sense. As has already been remarked, whenever they  dispassionately take thought and pass a judgment on the value of  human conduct, the common run of mature men approve workmanship  rather than sportsmanship. At the best, they take an apologetic  attitude toward the latter. This is well seen in the present (  May, 1 898) disturbance of the popular temper. While it may well  be granted that the warlike raid upon which this community is  entering is substantially an access of sportsmanlike exaltation,  it is to be noticed that nearly all those who speak for war are  at pains to find some colorable motive of another kind. Predatory  exploit, simply as such, is not felt to carry its own  legitimation, as it should in the apprehension of any species  that is primarily of a predaceous character. What meets  unreserved approval is such conduct as furthers human life on the  whole, rather than such as furthers the invidious or predatory  interest of one as against another.

      The most ancient and most consistent habits of the race will  best assert themselves when men are not speaking under the stress  of instant irritation. Under such circumstances the ancient bent  may even bear down the immediate conventional canons of conduct.  The archaic turn of mind that inclines men to commend workmanlike  serviceability is the outcome of long and consistent habituation  to a course of life of such a character as is reflected by this  inclination.

  
      Man's life is activity; and as he acts, so he thinks and  feels. This is necessarily so, since it is the agent man that   does the         thinking and feeling. Like other species, man is a  creature of habits and propensities. He acts under the guidance  of propensities which have been imposed upon him by the process  of selection to which he owes his differentiation from other  species. He is a social animal; and the selective process whereby  he has acquired the spiritual make-up of a social animal has at  the same time made him substantially a peaceful animal. The race  may have wandered far from the ancient position of peacefulness,  but even now the traces of a peaceful trend in men's everyday  habits of thought and feeling are plain enough. The sight of  blood and the presence of death, even of the blood or death of  the lower animals, commonly strike inexperienced persons with a  sickening revulsion. In the common run of cases, the habit of  complacency with slaughter comes only as the result of  discipline. In this respect man differs from the beasts of prey.  He differs, of course, most widely in this respect from the  solitary beasts, but even among the gregarious animals his  nearest spiritual relatives are not found among the carnivora. In  his unarmed frame and in the slight degree to which his muscular  force is specialized for fighting, as well as in his instinctive  aversion to hostile contact with the ferocious beasts, man is to  be classed with those animals that owe their survival to an  aptitude, for avoiding direct conflict with their competitors,  rather than with those which survive by virtue of overcoming and  eating their rivals.

      "Man is the weakest and most defenseless of all living  things," and, according to the Law of the Jungle, it is his part  to take advice and contrive and turn divers things to account in  ways that are incomprehensible to the rest. Without tools he is  not a dangerous animal, as animals go. And he did not become a  formidable animal until he had made some considerable advance in  the contrivance of implements for combat. In the days before  tools had been brought into effective use -that is to say,  during by far the greater part of the period of human evolution -man could not be primarily an agent of destruction or a disturber  of the peace. He was of a peaceable and retiring disposition by  force of circumstances. With the use of tools the possibility of        his acquiring a different disposition gradually began, but even  then the circumstances favoring the growth of a contentious  disposition supervened only gradually and partially. The habits  of life of the race were still perforce of a peaceful and  industrial character, rather than contentious and destructive.  Tools and implements, in the early days, must have served chiefly  to shape facts and objects for human use, rather than for  inflicting damage and discomfort. Industry would have to develop  far before it became possible for one group of men to live at the  cost of another; and during the protracted evolution of industry  before this point had been reached the discipline of associated  life still consistently ran in the direction of industrial  efficiency, both as regards men's physical and mental traits and  as regards their spiritual attitude.

      By selection and by training, the life of man, before a  predaceous life became possible, would act to develop and to  conserve in him instinct for workmanship. The adaptation to the  environment which the situation enforced was of an industrial  kind; it required men to acquire facility in shaping things and  situations for human use. This does not mean the shaping of  things by the individual to his own individual use simply; for  archaic man was necessarily a member of a group, and during this  early stage, when industrial efficiency was still inconsiderable,  no group could have survived except on the basis of a sense of  solidarity strong enough to throw self-interest into the  background. Self-interest, as an accepted guide of action, is  possible only as the concomitant of a predatory life, and a  predatory life is possible only after the use of tools has  developed so far as to leave a large surplus of product over what  is required for the sustenance of the producers. Subsistence by  predation implies something substantial to prey upon.

      Early man was a member of a group which depended for its  survival on the industrial efficiency of its members and on their  singleness of purpose in making use of the material means at  hand. Some competition between groups for the possession of the  fruits of the earth and for advantageous locations there would be  even at a relatively early stage, but much hostile         contact between groups there could not be; not enough to shape the  dominant habits of thought.

      What men can do easily is what they do habitually, and this  decides what they can think and know easily. They feel at home in  the range of ideas which is familiar through their everyday line  of action. A habitual line of action constitutes a habitual line  of thought, and gives the point of view from which facts and  events are apprehended and reduced to a body of knowledge. What  is consistent with the habitual course of action is consistent  with the habitual line of thought, and gives the definitive  ground of knowledge as well as the conventional standard of  complacency or approval in any community. Conversely, a processor  method of life, once understood, assimilated in thought works  into the scheme of life and becomes a norm of conduct, simply  because the thinking, knowing agent is also the acting agent.  What is apprehended with facility and is consistent with the  process of life and knowledge is thereby apprehended as right and  good. All this applies with added force where the habituation is  not simply individual and sporadic, but is enforced upon the  group or the race by a selective elimination of those individuals  and lines of descent that do not conform to the required canon of  knowledge and conduct. Where this takes place, the acquired  proclivity passes from the status of habit to that of aptitude or  propensity. It becomes a transmissible trait, and action under  its guidance becomes right and good, and the longer and more  consistent the selective adaptation through which the aptitude  arises, the more firmly is the resulting aptitude settled upon  the race, and the more unquestioned becomes the sanction of the  resulting canon of conduct.

      So far as regards his relation to the material means of life,  the canon of thought and of conduct which was in this way  enforced upon early man was what is here called the instinct of  workmanship. The interest which men took in economic facts on the  basis of this propensity, in the days before spoliation came into  vogue, was not primarily of a self-regarding character. The  necessary dominance of a sense of group solidarity would         preclude that. The selective process must eliminate lines of descent  unduly gifted with a self-regarding bias. Still, there was some  emulation between individuals, even in the most indigent and most  peaceable groups. From the readiness with which a scheme of  emulation is entered upon where late circumstances favor its  development, it seems probable that the proclivity to emulation  must have been present also in the earlier days in sufficient  force to assert itself to the extent to which the exigencies of  the earlier life of the group would permit. But this emulation  could not run in the direction of an individual, acquisition or  accumulation of goods, or of a life consistently given to raids  and tumults. It would be emulation such as is found among the  peaceable gregarious animals generally; that is to say, it was  primarily and chiefly sexual emulation, recurring with more or  less regularity. Beyond this there must also have been some  wrangling in the distribution of goods on hand, but neither this  nor the rivalry for subsistence could have been the dominant note  of life.

  
      Under the canon of conduct imposed by the instinct of  workmanship, efficiency, serviceability, commends itself, and  inefficiency or futility is odious. Man contemplates his own  conduct and that of his neighbors, and passes a judgment of  complacency or of dispraise. The degree of effectiveness with  which he lives up to the accepted standard of efficiency in great  measure determines his contentment with himself and his  situation. A wide or persistent discrepancy in this respect is a  source of abounding spiritual discomfort.

      Judgment may in this way be passed on the intention of the  agent or on the serviceability of the act. In the former case the  award of merit or demerit is to be classed as moral; and with  award of merit of this kind this paper is not concerned. As  regards serviceability or efficiency, men do not only take  thought at first hand of the facts of their own conduct; they are  also sensitive to rebuke or approval from others. Not only is the  immediate consciousness of the achievement of a purpose  gratifying and stimulating, but the imputation of         efficiency by one's fellows is perhaps no less gratifying or stimulating.

      Sensitiveness to rebuke or approval is a matter of selective  necessity under the circumstances of associated life. Without it  no group of men could carry on a collective life in a material  environment that requires shaping to the ends of man. In this  respect, again, man shows a spiritual relationship with the  gregarious animals rather than with the solitarY beasts of prey.

      Under the guidance of this taste for good work, men are  compared with one another and with the accepted ideals of  efficiency, and are rated and graded by the common sense of their  fellows according to a conventional scheme of merit and demerit.  The imputation of efficiency necessarily proceeds on evidence of  efficiency. The visible achievement of one man is, therefore,  compared with that of another, and the award of esteem comes  habitually to rest on an invidious comparison of persons instead  of on the immediate bearing of the given line of conduct upon the  approved end of action. The ground of esteem in this way shifts  from a direct appreciation of the expediency of conduct to a  comparison of the abilities of different agents. Instead of a  valuation of serviceability, there is a gauging of capability on  the ground of visible success. And what comes to be compared in  an invidious comparison of this kind between agents is the force  which the agent is able to put forth,.rather than the  serviceability of the agent's conduct. So soon, therefore, and in  so far, as the esteem awarded to serviceability passes into an  invidious esteem of one agent as compared with another, the end  sought in action will tend to change from naive expediency to the  manifestation of capacity or force. It becomes the proximate end  of effort to put forth evidence of power, rather than to achieve  an impersonal end for its own sake, simply as an item of human  use. So that, while in its more immediate expression the norm of  economic taste stands out as an impulse to workmanship or a taste  for serviceability and a distaste for futility, under given  circumstances of associated life it comes in some degree to take  on the character of an emulative demonstration of force.

            Since the imputation of efficiency and of invidious merit  goes on the evidence afforded by visible success, the appearance  of evil must be avoided in order to escape dispraise. In the  early savage culture, while the group is small and while the  conditions favorable to a predatory life are still wanting, the  resulting emulation between the members of the group runs chiefly  to industrial efficiency. It comes to be the appearance of  industrial incapacity that is to be avoided. It is in this  direction that force or capacity can be put in evidence most  consistently and with the best effect for the good name of the  individual. It is, therefore, in this direction that a standard  of merit and a canon of meritorious conduct will develop. But  even for a growth of emulation in the productive use of brain and  muscle, the small, rude, peaceable group of savages is not  fertile ground. The situation does not favor a vigorous emulative  spirit. The conditions favorable to the growth of a habit of  emulative demonstration of force are (1) the frequent recurrence  of conjunctures that call for a great and sudden strain, and (2)  exposure of the individual to a large, and especially to a  shifting, human environment whose approval is sought. These  conditions are not effectually met on the lower levels of  savagery, such as human culture must have been during the early  days of the use of tools. Accordingly, relatively little of the  emulative spirit is seen in communities that have retained the  archaic, peaceable constitution, or that have reverted to it from  a higher culture. In such communities a low standard of culture  and comfort goes along with an absence of strenuous application  to the work in hand, as well as a relative absence of jealousy  and gradations of rank. Notions of economic rank and  discrimination between persons, whether in point of possessions  or in point of comfort, are almost, if not altogether, in  abeyance.

      With a further development of the use of tools and of human  command over the forces of the environment, the habits of life of  the savage group change. There is likely to be more of  aggression, both in the way of a pursuit of large game and in the  way of conflict between groups. As the industrial efficiency of  the group increases, and as weapons are brought to greater  perfection,         the incentives to aggression and the opportunities  for achievement along this line increase. The conditions  favorable to emulation are more fully met. With the increasing  density of population that follows from a heightened industrial  efficiency, the group passes, by force of circumstances, from the  archaic condition of poverty-stricken peace to a stage of  predatory life. This fighting stage -the beginning of barbarism  -may involve aggressive predation, or the group may simply be  placed on the defensive. One or the other, or both the lines of  activity -and commonly both, no doubt -will be forced upon the  group, on pain of extermination. This has apparently been the  usual course of early social evolution.

      When a group emerges into this predatory phase of its  development, the employments which most occupy men's attention  are employments that involve exploit. The most serious concern of  the group, and at the same time the direction in which the most  spectacular effect may be achieved by the individual, is conflict  with men and beasts. It becomes easy to make a telling comparison  between men when their work is a series of exploits carried out  against these difficult adversaries or against the formidable  movements of the elements. The assertion of the strong hand,  successful aggression, usually of a destructive character,  becomes the accepted basis of repute. The dominant life interest  of the group throws its strong light upon this creditable  employment of force and sagacity, and the other, obscurer ways of  serving the group's life fall into the background. The guiding  animus of the group becomes a militant one, and men's actions are  judged from the standpoint of the fighting man. What is  recognized, without reflection and without misgiving, as  serviceable and effective in such a group is fighting capacity.  Exploit becomes the conventional ground of invidious comparison  between individuals, and repute comes to rest on prowess.

      As the predatory culture reaches a fuller development, there  comes a distinction between employments. The tradition of  prowess, as the virtue par excellence, gains in scope and  consistency until prowess comes near being recognized as the sole  virtue. Those employments alone are then worthy and reputable        which involve the exercise of this virtue. Other employments, in  which men are occupied with tamely shaping inert materials to  human use, become unworthy and end with becoming debasing. The  honorable man must not only show capacity for predatory exploit,  but he must also avoid entanglement with the occupations that do  not involve exploit. The tame employments, those that involve no  obvious destruction of life and no spectacular coercion of  refractory antagonists, fall into disrepute and are relegated to  those members of the community who are defective in predatory  capacity; that is to say, those who are lacking in massiveness,  agility, or ferocity. Occupation in these employments argues that  the person so occupied falls short of that decent modicum of  prowess which would entitle him to be graded as a man in good  standing. In order to an unsullied reputation, the appearance of  evil must be avoided. Therefore the able-bodied barbarian of the  predatory culture, who is at all mindful of his good name,  severely leaves all uneventful drudgery to the women and minors  of the group. He puts in his time in the manly arts of war and  devotes his talents to devising ways and means of disturbing the  peace. That way lies honor.

      In the barbarian scheme of life the peaceable, industrial  employments are women's work. They imply defective force,  incapacity for aggression or devastation, and are therefore not  of good report. But whatever is accepted as a conventional mark of a shortcoming or a vice comes presently to be accounted  intrinsically base. In this way industrial occupations fall under  a polite odium and are apprehended to be substantially ignoble.  They are unsportsmanlike. Labor carries a taint, and all  contamination from vulgar employments must be shunned by  self-respecting men.

      Where the predatory culture has developed in full  consistency, the common-sense apprehension that labor is ignoble  has developed into the further refinement that labor is wrong -for those who are not already beneath reproach. Hence certain  well-known features of caste and tabu. In the further cultural  development, when some wealth has been accumulated and the  members of the community fall into a servile class on the one  hand         and a leisure class on the other, the tradition that labor  is ignoble gains an added significance. It is not only a mark of  inferior force, but it is also a perquisite of the poor. This is  the situation today. Labor is morally impossible by force of the  ancient tradition that has come down from early barbarism, and it  is shameful by force of its evil association with poverty. It is  indecorous.

      The irksomeness of labor is a spiritual fact; it lies in the  indignity of the thing. The fact of its irksomeness is, of  course, none the less real and cogent for its being of a  spiritual kind. Indeed, it is all the more substantial and  irremediable on that account. Physical irksomeness and  distastefulness can be borne, if only the spiritual incentive is  present. Witness the attractiveness of warfare, both to the  barbarian and to the civilized youth. The most common-place  recital of a campaigner's experience carries a sweeping  suggestion of privation, exposure, fatigue, vermin, squalor,  sickness, and loathsome death; the incidents and accessories of  war are said to be unsavory, unsightly, unwholesome beyond the  power of words; yet warfare is an attractive employment if one  only is gifted with a suitable habit of mind. Most sports, and  many other polite employments that are distressing but  creditable, are evidence to the same effect.

      Physical irksomeness is an incommodity which men habitually  make light of if it is not reinforced by the sanction of decorum;  but it is otherwise with the spiritual irksomeness of such labor  as is condemned by polite usage. That is a cultural fact. There  is no remedy for this kind of irksomeness, short of a subversion  of that cultural structure on which our canons of decency rest.  Appeal may of course be made to taste and conscience to set aside  the conventional aversion to labor; such an appeal is made from  time to time by well-meaning and sanguine persons, and some  fitful results have been achieved in that way. But the  commonplace, common-sense man is bound by the deliverances of  common-sense decorum on this head -the heritage of an unbroken  cultural line of descent that runs back to the beginning.

  Thorstein Veblen
  The University of Chicago        