---
layout: narrative

title: >
    Mrs. Wharton's "The Valley of Decision", in: Nine Books of Some Importance
source: 
---

           
# MRS. WHARTON'S «THE VALLEY OF DECISION.»

  [^WhaR1Von1]

  There is a type of artistic temperament that seems to find a  sensuous satisfaction in vast canvases and themes of epic  magnitude. And since, in a certain sense, the novelist has a far  wider canvas than the artist upon which to paint his picture, he  runs a proportionately greater chance of overestimating his  strength. He is not limited by any single hour or day or year; he  is not bounded by the visible horizon; he may cover a whole epoch  in the history of an individual or a family or a nation; or he may  concentrate himself upon a single crucial moment in the life of a  man or woman. The value of what he does depends not upon the  breadth of the canvas, but upon the inherent truth of the  perspective, the accuracy of the line and colour, the subtle and  indefinable sense of proportion underlying the whole conception.   Yet the temptation to strive for something big and broad and  impressive, to paint humanity in the mass, to study not individual  lives, but the complex development of a race, has led astray more  than one of our promising younger writers. It is the sort of task  which demands a long apprenticeship. Kipling embodied in  *Kim* the thoughtful deliberation of a dozen years. Zola was  content to toil for more than twenty before he attempted to sum up  the motley life of the French metropolis in a single volume,  *Paris*. Tolstoy waited almost to the end of his career  before trying to epitomise all Russia in his *Resurrection*,  and even then, in spite of its acknowledged power, more than one  critic questioned its right to the title of the novel. Yet it is  just this sort of colossal task that the author of *The  Touchstone* serenely set herself in *The Valley of  Decision;* and the fact that the resulting novel is entitled to  a modicum of honest and cordial praise is in itself a recognition  of her versatility and her genius.  

Mrs. Wharton was fortunate at the outset in her choice of a  subject. She has attempted to sum up the life of Italy in the  latter half of the eighteenth century, that crucial  *settecento*, which has aptly been compared to the closing act  of a tragedy. It was that period of fallacious calm following the  war of the Austrian Succession, when beneath the surface all Italy  was seething with undercurrents of discontent against the old  established order of things; when «the little Italian courts were  still dozing in fancied security under the wing of Bourbon and  Hapsburg suzerains;» when clergy and nobles still clung tenaciously  to their class privileges and united in their efforts to repress  the spread of learning; when throngs of the ignorant and  superstitious still crowded the highroads to the shrines of popular  saints, and a small but growing number of enlightened spirits met  in secret conclave to discuss forbidden new doctrines of philosophy  and science. It is a vast subject, and one full of epic values—a  subject which it is easy to imagine a Balzac or a Tolstoy treating  in the bold, sweeping, impressionistic way that it demands. But it  is not easy to imagine what an introspective writer, a Bourget, or  a Henry James, could make of such a theme, and still less an avowed  disciple of Mr. James, such as Mrs. Wharton has hitherto shown  herself. That the resulting volume shows so much comparative  excellence is a pleasant surprise. She has brought to her task a  considerable amount of erudition. She is saturated to her finger-tips with the historical facts of the period—the motley and  confusing tangle of petty dukedoms, the warring claims of Austria  and of Spain. She has given us not merely a broad canvas but a  moving panorama of the life of that restless time, presenting with  a certain dramatic power the discontent of the masses; the petty  intrigues of the Church and the aristocracy; the gilded uselessness  of the typical fine lady with her *cavaliere servante*, her  pet monkey and her parrot; the brutal ignorance of the peasantry;  the disorders and license of the Bohemian  world—all the  various strata and sub-strata of the social life of the times. The  book is less a novel than a sort of cultured  *Sittengeschichte* of the epoch, as minute, as conscientious  and as comprehensive as a chapter from Gibbon's *Rome*, yet  lacking those little, vital, illuminating touches which help to  make us see. Her most obvious fault seems to be her avoidance of  the concrete and the specific. She delights in indulging in  generalities. She leaves a mental impression of crowds and  movement and the turmoil of hurrying, bustling human life; but when  we search in our memory for further impressions, we find them misty  and uncertain. The people, the scenes, the incidents, are often  not necessarily Italian at all. She is seldom definite enough in  her descriptions to be Much of the time we miss even the sunshine,  the blue sky, that redolence of warmth and colour and superficial  gayety which is the very essence of Italy—which fills every page  of Stendahl's *Chartreuse de Parme*, is woven into the woof  and warp of *Romola*, and goes far toward redeeming even the  tawdry sensationalism of such a writer as Ouida. There are times  when one cannot help feeling that Mrs. Wharton has something in  common with her hero, who, she tells us, «had lived through twelve  Italian summers without sense of the sun-steeped quality of an  atmosphere that even in shade gives each object a golden salience.   He was conscious of it now only as it suggested fingering a missal  stiff with gold leaf and edged with a swarming diversity of buds  and insects.» When she does pause to describe nature, it is  usually from a purely aesthetic point of view, with the  professional delight of an artist at a grouping of rocks, or trees,  or hills which would make an effective picture—«a scene which  Salvator might have painted;» or a bend in the road where «the  roadside started into detail like the foreground of some minute  Dutch painter.» And it is characteristic that these descriptions  are always of the briefest character. It is only when she becomes  interested in some matter of aesthetic or philosophic interest that  Mrs. Wharton becomes verbose. It is worth while to quote, even at  some length, a characteristic passage of this latter type, for  which such passages constitute a formidable proportion of the pages  of these two volumes—pages which are apt to remain unread, if not  uncut, by a large number of readers, both those who read frankly  for amusement, and those who look upon the novel as a serious and  important human document:

   In the semi-Parisian capital, where French architects designed  the king's pleasure-houses and the nobility imported their boudoir-panelings from Paris and their damask hangings from Lyons,  Benedetto Alfieri represented the old classic tradition, the  tradition of the «grand manner,» which had held its own through all  later variations of taste, running parallel with the  *barocchismo*of the seventeenth century and the effeminate  caprices of the rococo period. He had lived much in Rome, in the  company of men like Winckelmann and Maffei, in that society where  the revival of classical research was being forwarded by the  liberality of princes and cardinals and by the indefatigable zeal  of the scholars in their pay. From this centre of aesthetic  reaction Alfieri had returned to the Gallicised Turin, with its  preference for the graceful and ingenious rather than for the  large, the noble, the restrained; bringing to bear on the taste of  his native city the influence of a view raised but perhaps narrowed  by close study of the past; the view of a generation of architects  in whom archaeological curiosity had stifled the artistic instinct,  and who, instead of assimilating the spirit of the past like their  great predecessors, were engrossed in a sterile restoration of the  letter.

   Considered in its aspect of a novel, a story of human  interest, the shortcomings of *The Valley of Decision* are  somewhat more intangible, yet none the less they make themselves  felt. The characters are clearly and conscientiously drawn, the  drama in which they play a part deals with vital questions of life  and liberty and human happiness; and yet they leave us cold; they  fail for the most part to touch the keynote of responsive sympathy.   The explanation is somewhat hard to find; it lies, in part, at  least, in the author's obvious willingness to subordinate her  characters to the exposition of her main theme, the picture of  Italy as a whole. With this end in view it must be granted that  her plot is cleverly chosen. She has conceived a petty dukedom,  Pianura, in the north of Italy, owing allegiance to Charles  Ferdinand on the one hand, and attached by marriage to the house of  Hapsburg on the other. The hero, Odo Valsecca, is of the Old  Order, heir-presumptive to the throne of Pianura, and kept from the  succession only by a sickly cousin and the latter's dying child.   In his  character Odo represents the conflicting tendencies  of the times. He is in sympathy with the new ideas of progress and  liberty, and has brief flashes of energy and enthusiasm. But they  soon burn themselves out, for he is fundamentally lethargic and  indifferent, inheriting the fatal taint of his house. The heroine,  Fulvia Vivaldi, represents the new order. She is the daughter of  a professor of philosophy, who pays by exile the penalty for his  temerity in following up the forbidden learning. Under Fulvia's  influence Odo becomes an enthusiastic disciple of the new  philosophy, and he is on the point of sacrificing all his prospects  and accompanying her to France, when the death of his cousin  unexpectedly makes him Duke of Pianura. To both of them his duty  is plain. He must accept the burden, and devote his life to giving  the people that liberty to which they are entitled. For Fulvia  there are two alternatives. She may continue her way alone to  Paris, or she may remain at Pianura in a capacity which she will  not accept.

    «The Regent's mistress?» she said slowly. «The key to the  treasury, the back-door to preferment, the secret trafficker in  titles and appointments? That is what I should stand for—and it  is not to such services that you must even appear to owe your  power. I will not say that I have my own work to do; for the  dearest service I could perform would be to help you in yours. But  to do this I must stand aside. To be near you, I must go from you.   To love you, I must give you up.»

   So Odo returns alone to Pianura and in course of time marries  his cousin's widow, of the House of Hapsburg, with whom he might  eventually have been fairly happy. But three years later Fulvia  changes her mind, comes back to him, and accepts the very  conditions which she previously found such excellent reasons for  refusing. No doubt, had Mrs. Wharton chosen, she might have given  us a luminous picture of the mental transition through which her  heroine passed during these three years of self-inflicted exile.   But she has not chosen to do so, and the result is an impression of  inconsistency, a feeling that the Fulvia who went away and the  Fulvia who returned are not one and the same person. Apparently,  the only real necessity for her return was to pave the way for an  effective and tragic ending. Fulvia spurs Odo on to give the  people the liberal constitution for which they are not yet ready,  and in the midst of the resulting riots receives in her heart the  shot intended for her lover.  

This, in hasty outline, is the plot of *The Valley of  Decision*, and, frankly speaking, it is the least essential and  least interesting aspect of the book. What really do count are her  vivid pictures of life, the human interest of brief but crucial  moments, her wonderful intuition in analysing complex emotions—in  short, the same qualities which to a greater degree stamped the  appearance of her earliest volume as a literary event. In taking  up these volumes for a second time, one is apt to turn back to one  of just a few brief scenes luminous with comprehensions—such a  passage as this, for instance, describing an incident in Odo's  youth, when, as a boy of twelve, on his way to Turin, his lot fell  in for a single night with a company of strolling players:

   The pretty girl who had pillowed Odo's slumbers now knelt by  his bed and laughingly drew on his stockings. She was a slim,  brown morsel, not much above his age, with a glance that flitted  like a bird, and round shoulders slipping out of her kerchief. A  wave of shyness bathed Odo to the forehead as their eyes met; he  hung his head stupidly and turned away when she fetched the comb to  dress his hair.  

His toilet completed, she called out to the abate to go below  and see that the cavaliere's chocolate was ready; and as the door  closed she turned and kissed Odo on the lips.  

«Oh, how red you are!» she cried, laughingly. «Is that the  first kiss you've ever had? Then you'll remember me when you're  Duke of Pianura—Mirandolina of Chioggia, the first girl you ever  kissed!» She was pulling his collar straight while she talked, so  that he could not get away from her. «You will remember me, won't  you?» she persisted. «I shall be a great actress by that time, and  you'll appoint me*prima amorosa*to the ducal theatre of  Pianura, and throw me a diamond bracelet from your Highness's box  and make all the court ladies ready to poison me for rage!» She  released his collar and drooped away from him. «Ah, no; I shall be  a poor strolling player and you a great prince,» she sighed, «and  you'll never, never think of me again; but I shall always remember  that I was the first girl you ever kissed!»  

She hung back in a dazzle of tears, looking so bright and  tender that Odo's bashfulness melted like a spring frost.  

«I shall never be duke,» he cried, «and I shall never forget  you!» And with that he turned and kissed her boldly and then  bolted down the stairs like a hare. And all that day he scorched  and froze with the thought that perhaps she had been laughing at  him.

               *Frederic Taber Cooper.*           [^WhaR1Von1]: *The Valley of Decision. By Edith Wharton. New York: Charles  Scribner's Sons. $1.50.

  
     